Horror in Roleplaying

"Present fears are less than horrible imaginings."
­ Shakespeare

What is horror?
Many people have written many pages on the topic, "What is horror?" Is it fear? Is it
revulsion? Is it suspense? Does it have to incorporate an element of the supernatural? Does
there have to be blood or brutal violence depicted to qualify?
It's obvious that simply sticking the trappings of horror into a story ­ zombies, old castles,
buckets of blood, et cetera ­ do not transform it into "horror" automatically. I've laughed
through many a zombie movie, and have seen teams of adventurers sweep through the
vampire lord Strahd's castle in the classic AD&D module I6: Ravenloft like special ops anti­
vampire squads without feeling a quiver of fright.
For role­playing purposes, I am going to contend that horror is simply a genre whose goal is
the evocation of any of several different varieties of fear in its participants, ranging from the
basic and primal to the esoteric and cerebral. A mood of tension, or suspense, is generated by
the participants’ emotional investment in the story and their personal dread of what will be
revealed therein. The object of this fear is something that is somehow “bad” or “not normal.”
A work that produces this fear is defined as horror.
Horror can also be usefully defined in how it differs from other genres. Mystery, for example,
depends on the unknown nature of its antagonists and events to spur its plot along. A thriller
relies on creating a mood of suspense surrounding its unfolding events. Many an action movie
deals with evil monsters besetting the protagonists, who are sometimes fighting against
hopeless odds. Some dramas linger on the evils or insanities of man. None of these elements
in and of themselves create a sense of horror. Horror, to put it simply, scares you. Not just
with the momentary surprise of an opponent jumping out to attack, or with the suspense of
“Will he get off the mountain alive?” or with the question of “Who is the killer?”
Horror lies not just in the unanswered questions of a mystery, but also in fearing to learn the
answers. Horror does not lie in the suspense sparked by any surprise or unrevealed plot twist
of a suspense thriller, but in the heartfelt dread of what the plot will reveal next. It lies not in
the prospect of losing a fight with monsters, but in the prospect of losing one’s humanity
during that fight. It lies not in our knowledge of the insanity or evil of men – but in
experiencing it close up and in recognizing its trace in our own minds.

What is fear?
Fear has two components – an object (what you’re afraid of) and a motive (the reason why
you’re afraid).
"Not baked goods, professor… Baked bads!!!"
­ The Tick vs. The
Breadmaster

The Things That Should Not Be
The objects that generate the fear that horror thrives upon can be thought of, roughly, as “The
Things That Should Not Be.” This includes anything that people consider outside the range of
normality. Obviously malign supernatural entities qualify, as do scary but more mundane
threats like serial killers. On a less physical level, insanity and revelations of evil deeds that
men do are examples of things that strike us as “wrong” as well. Anything “unnatural,”
“uncanny,” “unknown,” “evil,” “mysterious,” “corrupted,” “immoral,” “inhuman,” or otherwise
hostile to our bodies, minds, souls, or sense of propriety can be an object of fear and thus be
used to evoke a mood of horror. For the rest of this essay I will use the terms “evil” and “evils”
to refer to The Things That Should Not Be, even though this is an imprecise term – insanity,
for example, is not really evil in a moral or theological sense. But it is evil in the sense of
being something we consider undesirable or not normal – what the Tick might call “a bad.”
What We’re Afraid Of
There are five major motives for fear that are dealt with in horror media. When we say that
“we’re afraid of” a monster, that’s not really what we mean – the monster is a bad thing, true,
but why are we afraid of it? We’re really afraid because it will hurt us, or hurt people we care
about, or because its existence means that the world isn’t how we like to see it. Below are the
real things that we are afraid of. I have listed them in rough order, from least to most deeply
horrifying.

1. Evil Threatening Us
The fear of evil befalling oneself – including the fear of danger, death, dying horribly,
injury, torture, mutilation, suffering, isolation, being unloved, being betrayed, or
anything else one can imagine. This basic terror is utilized by a wide variety of horror
movies – the Friday the 13th and Halloween series being prototypical examples, as the
protagonists are threatened with death by the evil creature stalking them. There are
plenty of non­supernatural examples of this kind of horror as well – from The Texas
Chainsaw Massacre to Seven.

2. Evil Threatening Others
The fear of evil befalling one’s loved ones – or, alternately, all humanity, the helpless,
the social order, or another higher­level abstraction of other people. The Exorcist is an
example of a work in this vein, showing an innocent girl being possessed and
corrupted by an evil force, as is Poltergeist, in which supernatural forces threaten the
protagonist’s family. On a non­supernatural note, the movie Cape Fear triggers this
type of horror in its watcher. The additional feeling of helplessness that a threat to
another person, not ourselves, whose actions and feelings we care about but are
outside our control, engenders in us additional terror.

3. Creating Evil Ourselves
The fear of creating something evil or of participating in something evil. Movies like
Rosemary’s Baby are examples of this level of horror, which depends on both the
terror of deep personal psychic violation and of the fear of harboring or creating
something evil yourself (literally or figuratively). Frankenstein, the classic novel, is
another example of facing the horror of your own evil creation. Examples of this kind
of horror that do not use a supernatural element are common – the horror of
discovering one of your children is evil, or that something you created is being used
for evil (Dr. Dyson in Terminator 2 has to face this kind of horror, when he discovers
his seemingly innocent experiments lead in the future to the near­extinction of the
human race). This level is where fear takes a turn inward, and is no longer completely
the fear of something “other” – since you are a willing or unwilling accomplice in the
evil, you find reason to fear yourself as well.

4. Being Evil Ourselves
The fear of being evil and performing evils – or of becoming evil, or of losing one’s
humanity or sanity. At their heart, the various vampire stories address this level of
fear – the fear of becoming something evil yourself (or, alternately, discovering that
you are already a base and twisted creature and didn’t know it – several of H.P.
Lovecraft’s short stories address this fear, as does the movie Angel Heart). A work that
details a person’s violation and abuse, and then explores their discovery that they were
themselves such an offender, would be a non­supernatural example of this type of
horror. It is less fundamentally horrifying to think of foul acts being perpetrated upon
you that to think of yourself perpetrating those horrible acts.

5. Living in an Evil World
The fear that the world, God, reality, the social order, or something else is evil, hostile,
or horrible. There are good examples of horror based on questioning the entire nature
of one’s reality – the movie Dark City is one, along with “cosmic” horror like H.P.
Lovecraft’s writings. The movie The Matrix, though not made as a horror movie, has
an example of this type of revelation – the movie’s protagonist finds out that his entire
world is false and that he and everyone he knows are just pieces of meat in huge
organic batteries. If the movie had stretched out its first section into a full story, and
had the climax of the movie be that revelation, it would have been a very effective
horror movie. Works in which the protagonist discovers that yes, indeed, they ARE
insane and the world is not the way they thought it was fit into this category as well.
We derive an especial dread from the concept that the entire universe is evil, or that
there is no such thing as good – that we are all doomed to pointless suffering and
everything is touched by the all­permeating evil.
These motives are found in many different variations and combinations in more specific
themes. The Nightmare on Elm Street movies, for example, revolve around the evil Freddy
Krueger invading the dreams of kids to kill them, to extract vengeance for his murder by those
children’s parents. The characters feel the fear of the direct threat (Evil Threatening Us), but
also some culpability by proxy for their parent’s actions in making Freddy what he is (Creating
Evil Ourselves), and his method of revenge leaves them often wondering if they are awake or
asleep and dreaming, or just going insane (a variation on Living in an Evil World).
These different types of horror are well illustrated by the movie Alien and its sequels. This
series does a very good job, in my opinion, of elevating the level of horror to a slightly deeper
and more esoteric level with each film. Interestingly enough, these movies are usually
classified as science fiction, not horror, though if you replace the alien antagonists with a
supernatural threat instead you can draw direct parallels between each of the movies and
other extant “horror” films.
Alien: This movie’s tension revolves around the fear of being eaten (or killed in a more
gruesome way) by a monster. This is a simple but effective play upon a basic fight­or­flight
human fear. Ripley, the protagonist, is stalked by a creature that she’s not capable of harming,
and is terrorized as it picks off her shipmates one by one. Its horror depends on the fear of evil
threatening us.
Aliens: The film initially operates on the same level as the first, but then the filmmakers
develop a more subtle form of horror when they threaten the little survivor girl Newt, who acts
as Ripley’s surrogate “daughter.” This triggers Ripley’s motherhood instinct and touches
something much more terrifying to her than the prospect of losing her own life – it is the
threat of death (or worse) happening to a loved one. Thus this movie takes the horror beyond
the simple threat­to­self theme of the first to the fear of evil threatening others.
Alien 3:
Ripley is faced with an even deeper violation in this film ­ she is "penetrated"
by an alien and at the end "gives birth" to a monster herself. This is still fear, but a more

"horrifying" fear – and not just a fear of personal violation (though this kind of ongoing or
developing violation is additionally horrifying; “I Have No Mouth, And I Must Scream” is a
very chilling Harlan Ellison short story that depends on the horror of profound physical and
mental violation). The core horror of this movie is Ripley’s fear of what she will have created.
Ripley knows that the Company is going to want to take and use the alien she births, visiting
its evil upon others. Her sense of horror thus revolves around a fear of being a part of this
evil, of furthering its cause against her will. This taps into our fear of creating evil ourselves.
Alien 4: Resurrection: Ripley herself is reborn in this film as a half­alien monster. This is the
ultimate level of horror ­ the fear of the present truth and reality, and doubting the goodness
and validity of one's own self and being. When she is confronted with other twisted,
subhuman clones of herself, the movie is saying to her directly “You, Ripley, are a monster.
You are hideous like these creatures, and evil like the aliens you hate.” She is no more sure
than the other characters are that this is not indeed the case. This is a clear appeal to we
viewers’ fear of being evil ourselves.
Unfortunately, there’s not an Alien 5 to illustrate the fear of living in an evil world, although
we can certainly imagine such a plotline (the aliens and the Company are both leading
candidates for making the fictional world pretty darn full of all­encompassing evil).
Of course, it is the delivery of these themes that turn them into horror. Neither monsters nor
the evil that lurks in men’s souls automatically evoke horror upon their discovery – it is instead
the suspense, fear, and revulsion that their careful revelation engenders in us. We will talk
more about the techniques of horror later.
True horror also results in a fear that is taken with the participant from the viewing, and
causes them to experience dread. “What if that monster really existed? What if that happened
to me? What if I found out that I was a monster?” These fears are the ones that make you
jumpy even after you’ve left the movie theater, and that cause you to think back on the story
with a feeling of apprehension.
Provoking an emotional response of this sort is a difficult task and bears some more in­depth
investigation. Take a moment to think about what movies, books, or TV shows you have
personally found the most horrifying. Try to establish what exactly about them you found
horrifying and the technique that they used to elicit that fear from you.

Why try to create horror in a role­playing game?
Because it’s enjoyable. Horror has existed from the earliest times; fairy tales and ghost stories
and epic tales like Beowulf all properly belong to the realm of horror. People have enjoyed
being scared vicariously for as long as they’ve been creating fiction. Just as the call of romance
or heroism is a universal component of humanity’s stories, the call of horror is one as well.
It should go without saying that anyone playing in a horror game should be willing to be
scared. If they just don’t like horror, or if they feel the need to not cooperate with the mood of
fear in the story to show the other players how “tough” they are, you’re not going to get very
far. The point is for all the participants to want to create and experience the frights that
horror offers.

How do I create horror in a role­playing game?
The Characters’ Role ­ Personal Investment
Much of what it takes to create horror in a role­playing setting is the same personal investment
that changes the game from a tabletop wargame to an experience of in­character role­play in

any genre. If neither player nor character finds the situation they are placed in personally and
emotionally compelling, horror is not generated – you can kill a character gruesomely, but you
haven't created a horrifying experience.
Generating personal investment has to begin before you start a horror adventure. Players need
to be comfortable with in­character play, feel attachment to their characters, and generally be
invested in the alternate reality of the game world to some degree. Otherwise there is not
enough relation of the player to the game to feel horror. This is similar to the characters,
settings, and situations in a horror story or movie. If they are not believable and compelling
then the audience does not "feel" the story. We have all seen B horror movies where the
characters are so stupid and so poorly motivated that we root for their horrid demise rather
than feeling pathos on their behalf.
You can help promote this investment at the time of play with the following practices that
promote all kinds of good in­character role­play:
a) Have believable, engaging characters. Obviously the players largely determine this factor,
but the GM and the rest of the group can do a lot to promote this. Staying in character is
important – and that goes doubly so for the GM. Nothing ruins in­character play more than
the GM “flat­out telling” the players something. All sensory input to the characters should
come through the game world. Metagaming should be discouraged. NPCs should be
interesting and three­dimensional. The depiction of NPCs and their reaction to the events of
the story is one of the most powerful tools the GM has in their arsenal of terror. Freakish
extras, “normal” people to be threatened, and other foils allow the PCs a view onto the terror
at hand.
b) Create realistic settings. The GM has almost complete control over this aspect of the game.
Horror and fear of the unknown work best in contrast to the safe and the familiar. When
describing the mundane or the supernatural, do not skimp on detail. Once things get freaky,
don’t hesitate to describe what’s going on at length – special effects are free when they’re being
created by your mind and voice. Use all five of the players’ senses (and the sixth when
feasible). They need to viscerally feel the “reality” of the setting, and the players’ suspension
of disbelief should be more jealously guarded than in any other genre.
c) Use uncontrived and interesting situations. In horror scenarios especially, the GM can be
tempted to “railroad” the plot and force players into certain directions. This may get ‘the plot’
moving but ruins the mood that is the goal of the plot. If your players trust your game
mastering enough to role­play their characters and their motivations fully, you have to be able
to create situations in which those characters are genuinely interested and willingly follow to
generate the plot.
Descriptions
The same scene can be either strongly evoke a sense of horror, or not do so at all, based on the
GM’s and players’ attitudes to the events depicted in the game as determined by these factors.
As an example, I recently read a short horror adventure in which one puzzle in a haunted
house required a character to eat a plate of bugs. In a casual role­playing environment it’s
pretty easy for the exchange to go like this:
GM: “There’s a ghost in this room, he says you have to eat a plate of bugs to get out of the
house.”
Player: “OK, my character puts on a little soy sauce and shotguns those puppies!”
GM: “You can go on.”
This is pretty weak and certainly not at all horrifying. Think to yourself how this scene would
be staged in a horror movie, and how you would personally react to this situation. The GM

should have laid the room (and ghost) description on thick, down to the clicking of the fat
beetles’ legs as they scurry across the scarred, dull pewter plate. Describe the eating process to
the willing player (the crunching, the oozing, the bits of chitin sticking between his teeth);
require CON checks of the character to see if he can handle this task without giving up his
lunch. Once the task is completed, just have the ghost, smiling wickedly, shimmer and
disappear – can they really get out of the house now? Or was it just a cruel trick? What
about the player who ate the bugs, is anything weird going to happen to him as a result? Pass
him some notes about how he feels strangely afterwards – neither he nor the other players will
be quite sure if there will be further repercussions.
Props and Activities
Feel free and use props and drawings as visual aids or other tricks to make the experience
more sensory for the players and aid them in having the "you are there" feeling. Darken the
room, and maybe put on spooky ambient music. Give the players handouts or even
constructed props when possible. Get the players physically involved – horror is one genre
where inserting a little bit of live­action influence is very effective. Have them move around.
If the party is separated, make the players separate into two rooms. Make them “show you
how” they are opening the door. Involving the physical body is a good way to get the mind
engaged. You will need to clamp down somewhat on out­of­game distractions (TV, reading at
the table, cutting up) as well. There is an essay by horror veteran John Tynes at
http://johntynes.com/revland2000/rl_mofo.html that deals primarily with interpersonal
tactics to keep players on edge while horror role­playing. It’s a little extreme but can give you
some inspiration on the subject.
I have played in the Cthulhu Masters Tournament held yearly at Gen Con, and they take great
care to get a separate room, set the mood, use props, and otherwise create a very immersive
horror gaming experience, and I have always found it to be very effective and enjoyable.
There’s nothing like being in a dark, oppressive room for four hours, wondering if the
strangers you’re with are really allies or cultists that would like to fillet you, and then typing
occult codes into a computer terminal and seeing the “screen” projected on the wall resolve
from digital gibberish into the words “UPLOAD SACRIFICE” to send chills up your spine.
Compartmentalization
It is very important in horror gaming for players to be linked strongly to their character’s in­
game experience. They should be restricted to knowing what their character knows in every
respect. Use written notes and take players aside and speak to them privately to inform them
of things that only their character has learned or sensed. Making characters actually speak to
one another to share information plays an important role in transforming the PC interaction
into something more realistic (and something more like you’d find in a horror movie). Use of
perception mechanics (e.g. d20’s Spot and Listen) is very important as well; it allows different
characters to perceive different things – and not know whether they can trust everyone else’s
perceptions.
In most RPGs there is the concept of player vs. character knowledge, and usually in sake of
expediency the players are trusted to know things and not let their characters act on that
knowledge. In horror, however, the point is to scare the players – and it is thus of paramount
importance that players not have access to knowledge that their characters do not.
Dissension
Also, sow a lack of confidence and dissension in the group of players. They should not be able
to trust each other all the time. You can use mind control, hallucinations, and the like to
control PCs, but even better is giving them reasons to not cooperate with the rest of the party.
This is extremely genre appropriate – nearly every modern horror movie with a group of
protagonists suffers from extreme dissention in the group – Aliens, Deep Rising, John

Carpenter’s Vampires, Night of the Living Dead… Allow players to play “bad guys” in the
party to betray the others, or better yet tempt their “good” characters with reasons to keep
things to themselves (or not to trust other party members). Players should feel isolation, not
security or comfort in their comrades, whenever possible.
Blurring the Lines
You may have noticed that the things I've described here elevate the sense of horror in the
player, not the character. Since horror is a feeling, that is necessary ­ for a character to be
horrified, all you have to do is have a player say, "my character's horrified!" Transferring that
feeling to the player is the real goal of a horror scenario. So the final thing you need to do is
to blur the lines a little between the player and character. This is an advanced topic in role­
playing. Naturally, a lot of what we do in an RPG is to come up with a character different
from ourselves and play them. We strive to keep a distinct line drawn between the players of
the game and the characters in the game, and for good reason.
The nature of story­generated emotion, however, is such that the greater investment you have
in the story, and the more you identify with the characters, the more deeply you partake in the
adventure. And though players can get emotionally invested in any character, the nature of
that investment in an RPG is that there are always elements of the player in the character. The
character is their mind’s creation, after all, and while the character might have different
powers and appearance from the player, their core psychology is mostly the same. Once you
have the standard techniques of horror down and want to take the game to the next level, you
can deliberately make use of the tactic of using player psychology against them. To use a
simple example, if a certain player really fears spiders, nothing will creep them out like spiders
on their character in the game. On a more subtle level, you can learn over time what affects
the players – not just the individuals, but also the group dynamic (for example, some groups
are more prone to fear and mistrust among their members, others are less so). Find the
weaknesses, the places where the players are affected and where they can be most effectively
horrified. You should always use this tactic carefully, infrequently, and subtly ­ but it works
very well.
Caveat Arbiter
Needless to say, you should engage in this practice with discretion and compassion. Your
players should want to be scared, and you should be sensitive to people’s real world issues – a
real world victim of abuse, for example, would probably have a strong negative reaction to in­
character abuse. Be aware of your player group and back off if anyone’s having a problem
with the subject matter.
The Story’s Role ­ The Fear of the Unknown
So now that they are "into" the game, what will truly horrify your players?
Terror and Revulsion
Two of the primary building blocks of horror are terror and revulsion. Terror is the feeling
generated by a scary event happening, especially in a surprising or shocking manner. A
sudden scare! Adrenalin floods into us, making us jittery. Well­timed shocks help you to
elevate the players’ suggestibility and make them more susceptible to fear. Revulsion is the
“gross­out” feeling created by gore or other viscerally unpleasant images (bugs, rats, demon
ichor, vomiting up a tequila­worm demon, a little girl’s head spinning around as she utters
horrific curses and stabs herself in the vagina with a crucifix, et cetera). Yuck! Nausea strikes
us and we want to turn away. Gore or other “disgusting” sights point indirectly to the Things
That Should Not Be and creep out the players on a gut level.

Surprise and revulsion can both be useful tools in generating an atmosphere of unease among
the players, but should be used with care (they grow old with overuse) and must be backed up
with a more deeply fearful to concept to generate a true feeling of horror in an adventure.
These are successful tactics, however ­ there are entire subgenres of horror that use suspense
or splatter nearly exclusively to generate their desired mood. Use them in your horror
scenarios to make them more effective. Both are direct links between a person’s mind and
their physical reactions, which make them useful to manipulate the participant’s feeling of
unease.
Established Horror Conventions
Using established horror conventions known by your players ­ like the spooky old house, the
creepy old man, or the grisly ghoul ­ can work for or against you. On the one hand, commonly
recognized horror conventions can work for you and generate the appropriate tone in the
game, insofar as the players associate those things with the feelings of horror and trepidation.
On the other hand, these things are so common that they risk becoming clichéd and eliciting
laughter or familiarity, not fear. Use them only so far as they are effective.
Dread
The true goal of horror is the feeling known as “dread” – the worry or anticipation, or one
might even say the surety, that bad things are going to happen. The cold shocks of terror and
gut­wrenching morbidity of revulsion are but means to this end. In the course of someone’s
normal day, they generally have the expectation that things are going to turn out all right.
They are going to go through their daily routine, and some good or bad things might happen,
but in the end things will continue on as usual and be OK. Properly applied horror reverses
this expectation and removes one’s default sense of security. It turns a person’s default setting
into a nearly­certain fear that things will not be OK ­ that the next door that is opened, or next
person that is encountered, or next revelation that is uncovered will be very bad and will make
the situation even worse. Your goal as GM is to work the players into a state where they are
beginning to experience this feeling (but ideally not so far that they give in to hopelessness,
which is the endgame result of fulfilled dread).
Terror and revulsion are unpleasant at the time. But dread is lasting. It causes a person to
fear the future – and to an extent, is retained even after the initial experience is over.
Gaming Anecdote – Terror and Dread
I once GMed an episode in a long­running D&D campaign where two of the
PCs, Orado and Mikhail, had separated from the rest of the group and were
traveling across country to perform a specific errand. They were taking a
break from the main campaign plot, which involved horrid Lovecraftian
creatures trying to emerge from the deep Underdark. While they were
traveling, they came across a gnomish burrow; its occupants offered to let
them spend the night. The players were quite serious types, as the campaign
was extremely dark in tone, and they talked with the gnomish leader at some
length, inquiring if he knew anything about threats from the Underdark. With
a completely straight face, I (as the gnomish leader) related a tale of evil dark
elves coming from the depths below, concluding with an aside about how the
drow warrens had extended, at one time, to underneath this very burrow.
So the players went to their reserved bedchamber, ill at ease. Well, the
gnomes had told this story to just about every traveler that came through, and
had a special practical joke prepared. All the walls in the burrow were of
packed earth, and in the middle of the night the PCs awoke to some noise and
the cracking of the far wall of their bedchamber! They could see a dark
humanoid form pushing through the wall – really just a mannequin painted
black, sealed into the dirt wall beforehand and then pushed in from an

adjacent room via an attached broom­handle. Well, the players were scared.
The combination of their fear of the Underdark threats in the campaign and
the gnomish story had them so on edge that the wizard, Orado, just panicked
and fired off a Color Spray in the close quarters of the room, knocking his
warrior comrade Mikhail unconscious but not seeming to stop the emergence
of the dark form. Mikhail’s player was scared and so mad he could spit,
fearing that his character would be slain without the opportunity to even
defend himself. Orado was freaking out and preparing to immolate the whole
room in a Fireball when he heard the gnomes’ laughter through the walls.
This unexpected scare certainly terrified them at the time, and even though it
turned out to be just a prank, it heightened their overall level of unease as
they returned to the “real” adventure. They felt additional dread about the
prospect of venturing into the cold vastness of the Underdark, even though
the scare they had was not truly related to that task at all.
This experiment in terror was a slightly more complex version of the classic
“cat scare” in a horror movie, where a character hears something moving,
creeps hesitantly towards it, and ROWR! It’s just a cat. The immediate
tension releases, but the underlying level of tension in the protagonist and
audience has been increased, and thus we experience enhanced anticipation
of bad things to come and jump twice as high when the monster really
appears.
"The oldest and strongest emotion of mankind is fear, and the oldest and
strongest kind of fear is fear of the unknown."
­ H.P. Lovecraft
The Known vs. The Unknown
The elements of the horror story fall into two major categories – those which are known to and
understood by the characters, and those that are unknown, incompletely known, or not
understood by the characters. This distinction is very important for game scenario­based
horror.
The Known
Even though, as I will discuss below, the unknown is the primary element that generates
horror, it needs bits of known information to be its catalyst in order to allow fear to form in
the players. Terror and revulsion, as discussed above, are examples of known information.
Something jumped out and scared you, or you found the pools of blood in the cellar. Bits of
information like this are what allow participants to detect and be involved in the plot.
You must beware of too much falling into the known category in a horror story, however.
When the players know too much about what’s going on, and they know what’s threatening
them and its capabilities, and they generally have enough information that they feel in control
of the situation, horror is a lost cause. Known information must simply be used in moderation.
Take the example of the PCs being stalked by a monster. Once the player characters know
exactly what the threat they are facing consists of, it ceases to become scary and instead
becomes a tactical exercise. Generally “spooky” monsters in RPGs tend to fall into the known
category because many players have their statistics memorized and so the creatures, no matter
how gruesome, become known quantities – dangerous, but predictable; a vampire becomes
like a rabid wolverine, just more powerful. In real life and in more visual media like the
movies, the threat of the known can be more keenly felt, but in games and fiction you tend to
have to rely on the unknown for horror’s effect.
Direct threats to the characters are likewise not tremendously effective in an RPG. There is
only so much fear you can generate by directly threatening the characters with death or other

physical punishment. The division between player and character kicks in sharply, and though
the character may be squealing in pain the player is sitting there thinking, "I wonder if the
cleric will be able to heal this?" Most RPG campaigns have a high degree of bodily threat to
their characters as an ongoing theme. As a result, characters tend to not be as afraid of threats
to their life as players are in the real world, and this means that horror based simply on those
kinds of direct threats is quite difficult to generate.
An interesting facet of the gaming medium is that it (usually) lacks an audience. In most
media – books, film, plays – the audience can be shown things that heighten their horror
without the protagonists seeing it themselves – like the numerous scenes of Michael Myers
stalking Jamie Lee Curtis’ character in Halloween. This allows the audience to have a bit more
“known” information to enhance their anticipation while keeping the protagonists in the dark
to keep the plot on track. You can’t do that in an RPG – the protagonists are the audience. So
you have to try to show the characters these things, but indirectly enough that they don’t
immediately find out what’s going on. You can show them clues (like footprints outside their
windows) and use NPCs to convey information about what they saw, as if they were the virtual
audience (“Hey man, I saw some creepy dude near your car yesterday…”).
Information should be carefully parceled out to the players in a way that increases their
suspense and keeps them in the dark about the really fundamental questions about what is
going on.
The Unknown
The thing that discomfits players the most is the unknown. Games, even more so than real
life, have defined rules and standard conventions. Things outside these conventions cause
stress and fear in the players. Whenever players do not know what evil forces are at work,
they fear them – and their imaginations conjure up specters of the unimaginable for you.
To have a fear of the unknown, characters and players alike must at least know that there is an
"unknown" to fear. The most compelling horror stories introduce the idea that something is not
quite right very slowly. The first duty of the GM is to decide what in the story is going to be
unknown and therefore able to generate horror in the characters. It can be something basic,
like being hunted by a creature too powerful to overcome, with unknown capabilities and
weaknesses – in this case the burden of generating horror rather than a tactical exercise by
using mood and setting falls upon the GM. It can be something much more esoteric – imagine
that one of the players discovers that their family, or the god they worship, or even they
themselves are something monstrous and inhuman. In any event, the GM should plan out the
unknown factors and construct the sequence of revelations in order to heighten the players’
fear – each new revelation should make the players feel like things are getting worse, not
better. Characters should be shown only hints of what is going on, just enough to build up
their feeling of dread, and no farther. Of course, additional information should be divulged
over time or the players will have no sense of progress. But what they discover should be
increasingly unnatural and disturbing.
How do we generate fear of the unknown, also known as "dread," in a RPG? It seems to me
that one thing that contributes to our fear of the unknown is that our sensory input, ability,
and knowledge is limited. In the movie The Blair Witch Project, unexplained and threatening
phenomena (the rock piles, the noises, the hanging effigies) appear without any known cause
or agent. The characters suffer from an inability to see or confront possible attacker(s) and the
inability to escape. They do not know where they are, how to get away, who or what is
harassing them, what the harasser’s agenda is, where they are, or what they will do next.
They also don’t know if they can trust their fellows. This placed them (and us, on their behalf)
into an extremely excitable, suggestive state extremely conducive to horror.
It would have been more difficult to make the same movie about three experienced
woodsmen. Characters in role­playing games are often highly competent heroic personalities,
with magic or technology at their fingertips ready to deal with such problems. For horror to
work the gamemaster has to come up with ways to make things still unknowable and

mysterious despite the characters’ body of abilities. In high­powered games (fantasy or science
fiction especially) it can be difficult to keep the answers to certain questions from the
characters. If the players can detect whether something is magical/supernatural or not, can
speak with dead victims, and can consult their god on where the “bad guys” are hiding out,
then it is a bit more of a challenge to generate horror – but not impossible. The key is to
concentrate on questions the PCs can’t answer.
The story should, at some point, come after the PCs specifically. There’s only so long that they
can investigate or otherwise mess with the unknown forces at the heart of the story without
being noticed by those forces. Forcing the players into a reactive mode, and forcing them to
defend themselves instead of being on the offensive, will help throw them off balance and
make them worry more.
Let’s say that you have a storyline in which an evil wizard is kidnapping people and using them
to create twisted clone servants for himself. This storyline could be handled in the traditional
D&D way – the PCs quickly find clues leading them to the wizard’s keep; they sweep and clear
the “dungeon” and kill the wizard. But the same storyline can be used to generate a very
convincing horror scenario if played differently. People begin to disappear, and the PCs can’t
stop it from happening. But they disappear gradually, while the PCs are involved in other
plots. At first, unknown people disappear, but then the victims grow closer and closer to the
PCs. First, it’s that cleric that they bought healing from last month. Next, it’s the bar wench
they always flirt with. Suddenly this isn’t a random adventure hook, but it’s something that
the players feel personally invested in. They investigate, and you let them get closer only
gradually. They come upon a house right after a kidnapping; the place is trashed and there’s
blood all around. Maybe the corpse of one of the victims shows up – and it’s clearly been
professionally dissected. Unknown to the party, it’s not really the victim’s corpse, but that of a
test clone; it was dissected because the wizard wanted to make sure it was a good copy. Speak
with Dead therefore reveals only somewhat bizarre information. Eventually, a victim shows
up at the PCs’ doorstep and says, “Oh, I escaped from this horrible place! Come see!” When
the PCs arrive at the wizard’s mansion, it turns out that the “victim” lured them there to be
trapped… This can be done in such a way that Detect Magic, Evil, or Lie reveals nothing
wrong. Do what you can to make the PCs feel like they don’t know what is going on, that the
dark forces at work are always a step ahead of them, and that they are at risk of doing the
wrong thing themselves. In this particular scenario, it’s difficult to know who to kill –the
wizard might Charm the real victims and send them after the PCs along with clones, the PCs
might kill the victims they hope to save – of course, they find out too late what is going on...
Separate the party when possible. Take PCs aside and talk to them privately. Bring the group
back together. Are any of the PCs clones now? Keep as much unknown as possible. If the PCs
know they are heading out to kill an evil clone­making wizard, it’s harder to make the
experience horrifying. If, however, the PCs don’t know there’s a wizard behind it, don’t know
if they are dealing with doppelgangers or necromancy or a conspiracy or what, and don’t know
who they can trust – then you’re cooking.
Related to this theme of limited knowledge is the use of familiar, safe things which are then
somehow corrupted into instruments of horror ­ this is a special case of limited knowledge,
where the players think they "know" something but are sadly mistaken. Horror stories
involving children, clowns, the family house, etc. use this particular tactic. Stephen King
makes use of common items and feelings to generate horror in many of his novels ­ for
example, the family pet in Cujo and Pet Sematary, or common human experiences like
inability to sleep or adolescence in Insomnia and Carrie.
Once you have a strong sense of the unknown in play, and have set an appropriate mood, the
characters’ imaginations begin to work in your favor. Imagination is the hallmark of RPG
players in general, and is a useful tool in the hands of a horror GM. Players begin trying to put
together reasons “why this is happening.” They will develop a number of options on their
own, and with some prompting those options can be pretty terrifying (sometimes more
terrifying than the original story calls for).

Gaming Anecdote
In the same long­running D&D horror campaign, one of the PCs (Mikhail the
warrior) was hired by a local notable to go find his long­lost younger brother.
The whole setup was very suspicious, as the boy’s mother had fled with the
baby many years ago, for reasons that the man was unwilling or unable to
divulge. Mikhail sought after the boy, eventually tracking the twenty­year­old
trail north to a small village – his home village, that he had left long ago and,
according to his character’s background write­up, wasn’t even sure exactly
where it was located. He found out that indeed, his parents had taken him in
from the terrified woman, who died soon after.
As the campaign progressed and the PCs went deeper into the Underdark,
fighting kuo­toa and other aquatic creatures, Mikhail started to exhibit some
odd traits and have disturbing dreams about swimming with fish­men in the
depths. He hid this from the rest of the party, suspecting that it was a curse or
a side effect of some of the magic they were using – but then he discovered,
much to his horror, that the transformation was perfectly natural – given his
heritage…
The other PCs certainly didn’t trust him much once they found out, and he
had reason to mistrust himself – he was a monster, after all, with increasingly
strange urges. The player in question had read Lovecraft’s “The Shadow over
Innsmouth” and should have known what was coming, but it was introduced
so gradually that he didn’t make the connection until it was too late. This
experience turned into a very strong horror element in the campaign, which
affected all the players, giving them the desired sense of unease and horror.

Pacing
As the game progresses, whether it is a one­shot scenario or a multiyear campaign, there is a
critical need for good dramatic timing. The sense of fear should be heightened, then released ­
but each time only a partial release, building into more horror. Then it should be heightened
to a fever pitch, brought to some kind of direct conflict, and then and only then released. The
general rules of dramatic tension and the same tools that create suspense in any genre apply
here, although unexpected plot twists and deviations from “standard” plot timings are also
important to maintain the sense of unease in the player characters. There are no hard and fast
rules to follow to develop good timing. You as a GM have an advantage that no author,
playwright, or director does, however – you are experiencing direct feedback from your
participants as the plot unfolds. This is your most valuable tool. You can see when they are
scared and want more, or when they are overloaded and need a respite, or when they are truly
uncomfortable and horrified. Luckily, the plot is never fixed until it happens – you are free to
adapt anything you want in order to maintain the mood. Speed up, slow down, cut out, add
to as needed. Don’t adhere mindlessly to “your plan.”
Gaming Anecdote
In one session early in my example campaign, we had an entire very
successful horror episode that was conducted entirely off the cuff. With a
careful eye on the players, appropriate timing was not that hard to create.
The PCs were wandering interminably through some abandoned farmland,
searching for clues germane to the plot at hand. I was just throwing local
color and wandering monsters at them, getting them into the mood and
letting them role­play with each other. The group took cover in an abandoned
barn during a thunderstorm and began poking around, as bored adventurers
are wont to do. One of them was rooting around in the stale straw covering
the floor, and found a human skull, and then the rest of the skeleton. I just
threw it in there to see how they’d react. Well, the mood was right, and all

the players perked up. For whatever reason, it had given them a brief chill.
After an investigation, they determined that whoever it was must have hung
himself on the main rafter long ago. When they left the barn, they had a
telltale air of unease about them that signaled to me that they were ready for
some horror. But even I wasn’t sure what from yet.
Next, they passed by an old abandoned house, which without thinking I
described as being a two­story plantation style house. One of the PCs took
note, and said, “Hey, that’s weird, a two­story house is for rich people, all the
farmers’ houses we’ve found out here so far are one­story three­bay hovels.”
So the party, suddenly interested, decided to investigate that house. They
were fully in character, and invested in what was going on (as you’ll recall,
two of the building blocks that enable horror to really work in a game).
I needed no further prompting, and during a brief food and bathroom break I
threw together a quickie house floor plan and some ideas as to what could
happen.
The party began to investigate the house. At first, it was just a moderately
creepy abandoned house, with patches of mildew and layers of dust on every
available surface. But then some small oddities appeared. One character
heard a dripping sound in one room and was unable to locate its source.
Another saw something odd in a mirror, just for a second… Just enough to
elevate their level of tension, but still very subtle, not providing any proof that
there was anything really odd going on. And then they got into a locked room
on the first floor that was completely painted black and decked out with a
large ritually inscribed summoning circle. One particularly brave party
member stepped into the circle, and clearly heard the dripping sound – but no
one outside the circle could hear it. Needless to say, this discovery was of
great concern to them and they moved into high gear in investigating. They
started to split up, much to my delight – it was a small house, and they
weren’t out of earshot of each other, so they felt it was safe. I gave a lot of
information to the subgroups in the form of notes, so that the other PCs
wouldn’t know what was going on in other parts of the house. There was
some scratching in the walls, as if from rats moving about. They found some
other spooky clues, like an abandoned girl’s room with a notepad that had all
the writing torn out; a rubbing of the first blank page revealed some strange
ranting about ‘rituals’ from the seemingly innocent but willing writer. And a
master bedroom that had a series of portrait paintings in it that had been
slashed and deliberately made completely unrecognizable. Some of the party
found a room on the second floor that was covered, walls ceiling and floor,
with chalk lines in strange geometric patterns. They took care not to break
any of the lines, and found a trap door in the ceiling and opened it. The
person being lifted up to climb up into the attic had a nasty shock as they
found a dead body lying right there next to the trap door. It was in an
advanced state of decay, but oddly had not been chewed on by the rats (the
PC could hear some rats skittering about in the dark recesses of the attic).
Meanwhile, a liquid started to slowly form in the bottom of the summoning
circle and drip upwards to the ceiling. The PCs downstairs took notice and
looked on with some concern. At this point everyone was really, really
nervous. They had discovered more than enough clearly unnatural but
completely inexplicable things, and what with the dripping and the dead body
and all, they had reached a very high level of tension and had seen most (but
not all) of the house – and thus I chose my opportunity to strike.
The PC in the attic was looking about, and coming around the chimney was
confronted with – I didn’t tell him what. He made a Sanity check and failed.
I told the characters waiting below the trap door that they heard a horrible
scream, and the next thing they knew the PC came tumbling out of the trap
door to the ground below, breaking the chalk lines on the floor (and
immediately scrambling to his feet and fleeing as quickly as he could).

At that instant, the liquid dripping upwards in the summoning circle
downstairs (immediately below the room with the chalk lines) became a
torrent. The PCs downstairs started to scream to warn the PCs upstairs. All
hell broke loose, as the chalk lines started to ooze, then gush liquid, turning
into a flood washing the upstairs PCs down the hallway and then down the
stairs. The rat­scrabbling in the walls immediately recommenced, very loudly
and seemingly throughout the house.
As the house went into full scale Amityville Horror mode, the already creeped­
out party freaked. Many of the PCs on the first floor fled the house
immediately. Within short order, all the PCs had decided that they just
wanted OUT. One character, in a panic, actually threw himself out a second
story window in order to escape. The second all the PCs were outside the
house disappeared, leaving a blackened mark in the grass where the
summoning circle had been. Out back, they found a small enclosure built into
the ground, with a heavy door and manacles inside – obviously used to keep
someone prisoner. And in the cell, water (from the frequent rain) was
dripping to its floor, making the exact sound they had heard in the house.
The players had an extremely enjoyable bout of horror that day. They kept
pressing me to tell them “what was up with that house!” (I refused, of course,
only adding to their enjoyment of the story.) It had started out as a
throwaway scenario, and I made most of it up as I went along, but it became
one of the group’s most memorable experiences from early in the campaign.
Naturally, I just had to bring the house back later – in fact, they liked it so
much that I decided to make its secret a very integral part of the campaign.
By cueing off what the PCs were responding to and enjoying, I managed to
evoke a great deal of horror quickly and without any preliminary planning.
And if it’s just not working – try again later. You need a specific chemistry to enable a group
experience of horror, and you can’t force it if it’s not going to happen. A good sense of pacing
includes the knowledge of when to do something else for a game session.
Revelation
Some horror stories end with the realization that what was unknown is now all known – “Ah,
it was Old Man Jenkins all along!” This is a legitimate tactic. However, the more that is
fundamentally unknown about a situation, the greater the sense of horror you can generate.
Even if the primary threat of the adventure is dealt with, if the players are left still unsure
about what exactly was going on their imagination continues to work for you. Resist the urge
to explain everything. “We stopped the takeover of the town – but we still don’t know who
was behind it in the first place!” Of course, having the players think they know what
happened when they really don't is great if it can come back to haunt them – a crude example
of this is the frequently exaggerated demise of Jason in the Friday the 13 th movies. If, even
once a horror episode is over, you refuse to explain it (in character or out), then the
continuation of the players “not knowing for sure” causes the episode to retain its hold over
their imaginations, and gives them a take­away feeling of dread that is the hallmark of true
horror.
The only thing we have to fear is fear itself ­­ nameless, unreasoning,
unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into
advance.
­ Franklin D. Roosevelt, First Inaugural Address, Mar.
4, 1933

Fear and Insanity
In my analysis of Alien 4: Resurrection, I described Ripley as having a fear of her own self.
That fear came from not knowing what she might do or whether she would have control over
her own actions. Poe took this type of "fear of the unknown part of the self" to its highest
pitch. Several characters in Poe's writing seem to gradually realize the capacity for evil in
themselves and eventually go mad as a result – for example, in the short story “The Tell­Tale
Heart.” Interestingly enough, madness (at least in Poe's universe) is the ultimate un­
knowledge of one's self – a complete loss of control and sense of reality. The cause of our fear
of the unknown would seem to be based on fear of our own physical/mental/psychological
weaknesses ­ plain old human fallibility. Similarly, in Lovecraft's writings, insanity is often
generated by the realization of the vastness of great, alien cosmic power and the irrelevance
and impotence of all humanity in the universe.
Many horror games (Call of Cthulhu, Ravenloft, Unknown Armies) have a game mechanic
designed to model PC fear, insanity, or other form of mental imbalance. These rules are useful
but without adequate in­game justification their use can be unconvincing and flat. I have had
success using dreams, voices, etc. with characters and using those to generate a feeling of
insanity or loss of mental faculty. In general, it’s best to have the player really feel like their
character may be going mad, rather than to just tell them “you’re going mad.” However,
having such a mechanic around does awaken players to the possibility that PCs might be
acting erratically, which helps to generate the mood of unease important to a horror scenario.
You can get a lot of mileage out of implication. For example, you can describe the movement
of a person towards a character in a way that makes it seem threatening or non­threatening.
Insanity is all about distorted perception, so if a PC who’s getting paranoid is in a given
situation, you can always describe it as being more threatening that it is – they might see “A
man moving towards you, eyes fixed balefully on you with hateful recognition in his eyes.”
Another more sane character might see “A man wandering over towards you, looking at you
hesitantly like he wants to ask you a question.”
Whenever you want a character to go insane, the best way to go about it is to discuss it with
the player. They agree to start playing the character ‘a little crazy’. You then try to give the
character plausible in­story reasons for acting oddly – the combination of the player
understanding that their character is unstable combined with the stimuli you provide should
provide a fairly realistic (to the other players) picture of someone suffering mental problems.
Of course, if you are doing your job right, the players might be wrong about who is going
crazy and who is going sane in a crazy world…
Gaming Anecdote
In the same campaign from the other examples, there was a female character named
Damia. I was using the Call of Cthulhu Sanity tracking mechanic in the game, but
tried to not enforce it directly, but to instead have the players feel like their character’s
erratic actions were a natural outgrowth of their situation. Anyway, as background,
Damia was an orphan and was generally unwanted as a child (a half­elf who grew up
among the gypsies, and the gypsies pawned her off on the player characters at the first
opportunity). She had come into conflict with some of the party, as they tended to
take the “destroy anything in our path” approach and Damia took the “don’t kill if you
can help it, and hug trees whenever possible” approach. While the party was traveling
through the Underdark, Damia was kidnapped from the party by a bunch of hideous
tentacled monsters (grell, but as a good horror GM I never used that term with the
players). The rest of the party was left behind, paralyzed. They took her to a place
where a huge, foul, tentacled creature out of a Lovecraft story (a deepspawn) waited.
According to the dice, she took a really big Sanity hit about this time. The deepspawn
telepathically contacted her, showing her how it wanted to devour her and then
reproduce her as its “children” (all the grell were spawn as well). After a brief
consultation with the player, I decided to cast this psionic image in a light as favorable
to her mind as possible – a chance to be a part of a “family,” to be one with

someone/thing and to produce “children” of her own. She didn’t buy it totally, but it
was a benevolent enough image that her “love critters, don’t kill them” instincts were
activated.
So when the party came to her rescue and slew the thing, she was not grateful (as
they expected) but instead chided them and wept for the dead “mother.” The party
thought that she was completely insane. She wasn’t – well, just a little. As Damia
suffered from more sanity problems later on, she tended to over­empathize with
monsters and other evil folks, even to the point of letting them attack her or colluding
with the enemy. But her behavior, from the player’s point of view, was a logical (if a
little skewed) consequence of her experiences. From the rest of the party’s
perspective, she was crazy and a danger to herself and others.

What game system should I use?
There are a number of games or game supplements out there that are specifically directed
towards horror, and often contain good information on how to conduct horror role­playing ­
Call of Cthulhu, Ravenloft, Deadlands, Dark Conspiracy, Chill, Whispering Vault, Unknown
Armies, Kult, Don't Look Back, Little Fears, the White Wolf games… I hope this essay
demonstrates, however, that horror can be worked into any game regardless of genre. I often
find that horror can be actually inhibited by playing a pure "horror game" ­ in Call of Cthulhu
tournament scenarios, for example, everyone knows what to expect, and the question becomes
simply a tactical one of "How do we kill/escape from the zombies/aliens/sorcerers/Great Old
Ones?" Playing a game in this fashion, even an allegedly horror­oriented game system, is self­
defeating because it goes against the primary fear of the unknown that is instrumental in
generating horror.
In a role­playing context you have two primary options as to format – you can run a single
horror scenario, or use horror as a campaign theme. In a single scenario, like in a horror
movie, you are required to develop the horror quite quickly and at times violently. Real and
immediate threat to the characters is usually required, and this is dangerous in a long­term
game with established characters. Of course, the benefit of this is that you can treat characters
as badly as you wish in a single scenario, and the players don’t suspect that you will hesitate to
kill all of them off. A campaign, like a TV show, requires a lighter hand – the cast of characters
can’t all die off every episode or the series suffers. In this longer format, you can make use of
foreshadowing and prefigure horrific events to come, and develop the themes of the campaign
and knowledge that there is an unknown to fear quite gradually. This gradual development
allows for a more deeply affecting horror experience.
I like to run pure horror game systems as one­shot adventures, but for campaigns I tend to use
more "value neutral" games like D&D, and then insert the horror gradually ­ this violation of
convention and turning slowly from the known to the unknown is more effective in generating
true horror in the long run.

Bibliography/Other Resources
Here are some horror gaming resources that I personally have found to be helpful.
Nightmares of Mine is a 171­page RPG sourcebook from I.C.E./Chaosium about horror in role­
playing in particular. Includes extensive bibliographies on horror films, books, RPGs, etc. It is
available from http://www.ironcrown.com/ (see the “The Standard System” area).
Supernatural Horror in Literature, an essay by H.P. Lovecraft, is a treasure trove of information
on horror writers and a discussion of the fundamentals of horror literature. It is available from
Amazon and other book vendors.

Writer’s Digest Books has several lines of factual resources designed for authors that can give
you some valuable “realism” help – besides a book on “Writing Horror,” their “Howdunit”
series has entire books on forensics, poisons, investigative techniques, and other helpful things,
and their “Everyday Life” series has all kinds of great info on everyday life in a number of time
periods and places. http://www.writersdigest.com/
RPG.net has a column dedicated to horror gaming at
http://www.rpg.net/news+reviews/collists/phobia.html ­ it’s not all that great, but does have
some things to think about.
DEMONGROUND: Reflections of a Darker Future (http://www.demonground.org/) is a fanzine
dedicated to supporting the genre of modern horror in role­playing games.
Google ­ if you just want a bunch of horror gaming links to check out, try
http://directory.google.com/Top/Games/Roleplaying/Genres/Horror/.
This text was downloaded from
http://www.mindspring.com/~ernestm/horror/horror.html
in 2014

