TM

Fantasy R oleplaying in the W orld of T he Hobbit ™ and T he L ord of the R ings™

Based on the novels by J.R.R. T olkien
by G areth R yder -H anrahan , with F rancesco N epitello

- credits Written by Gareth Ryder-Hanrahan
Additional Writing by Francesco Nepitello
Concept by Francesco Nepitello
The One Ring rules designed by Francesco Nepitello with Marco Maggi
Art by Jon Hodgson, Jason Juta and Jordy Lakiere
Editors: Andrew Kenrick
Graphic Design: Paul Bourne
Creative Director: Dominic McDowall
Line Developer (Cubicle 7 Entertainment): Gareth Ryder-Hanrahan
Line Developer (Sophisticated Games): Francesco Nepitello

Published by Sophisticated Games Ltd, 1 Andersen Court, Newnham Road, Cambridge CB3 9EZ, UK and
Cubicle 7 Entertainment Ltd, Riverside House, Osney Mead, Oxford, OX2 0ES, UK.

The Darkening of Mirkwood, The One Ring, Middle-earth, The Hobbit, The Lord of the Rings, and the characters, items, events and places
therein are trademarks or registered trademarks of The Saul Zaentz Company d/b/a Middle-earth Enterprises and are used under license by
Sophisticated Games Ltd and their respective licensees.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior permission of the publishers.

2

- contents The Darkening of Mirkwood

4

A Chronology of Wilderland
Rules for Holdings

4
8

The Tale of Years
The Last Good Years:

10

2947-2950

11

Year 2947
The Wizard’s Man
Year 2948
The Folk-moot at Rhosgobel
Year 2949
The Questing Beats
Year 2950
Secrets Buried

11
11
13
13
17
17
19
20

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

24

Year 2951
The Helm of Peace
Year 2952
The Staff of the Roadwarden
Year 2953
The Beast of the Forest
Year 2954
The Lost Path
Year 2955
Treacherous Waters
Year 2956
Murder in Lake-town
Year 2957
The Siege of Black Tarn Hall
Year 2958
Saving the Maiden
Year 2959
The Horse-Lord’s Daughter
Year 2960
The Death of Ingomer

24
24
27
27
30
31
34
34
38
38
41
41
45
45
50
50
58
59
61
61

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

64

Year 2961
Paying the Troll
Year 2962
Honour Among Thieves

64
65
68
69

Year 2963
The Anger of the Elvenking
Year 2964
The Greydelve
Year 2965
The Thief of the Lamp
Year 2966
Return to Dol Guldur

The Years of the Plague:
2967-2974

84

Year 2967
Treachery in the Woods
Year 2968
Nine in the Hall
Events in the Hall
Year 2969
Wheels within Wheels
Year 2970
Slaying the Forest Dragon
Year 2971
The Dying of the Light
Year 2972
The Hame of the Vampire
Year 2973
The Reach of the Shadow
Year 2974
Beorn’s Quest

84
84
88
89
91
94
94
97
99
101
101
104
104
108
108
111
111

The Darkening of Mirkwood:
2975-2977

116

Year 2975
The Last Folk-moot
Year 2976
The March of the Woodmen
To Rivendell
Year 2977
Epilogue: The Passing of the King

116
116
118
118
121
123
123

Appendix

125

The Nazgûl of Dol Guldur
Characters and Creatures

126
130

Index

3

71
71
73
74
75
75
80
80

140

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Events: Here are listed a number of noteworthy things
that happen in Mirkwood and the lands immediately
surrounding it. Sometimes, events that occur far from the
forest, either on the edge of the Wild or in civilised lands to
the South, are also featured. The companions may or may
not hear tell of such things, depending on circumstances.

the darkening of
- mirkwood -

This supplement tells of the Darkening of Mirkwood
– how it began, how it progressed, and how the heroes
can possibly avert the worst effects of it. The structure
of the campaign was originally presented on pages 111
to 119 of the Loremaster’s Guide. Its theme and focus
is summarised there, and contains information about
important Loremaster’s characters like Beorn and
Radagast, and other plot elements and characters created
expressly for the telling of the saga, such as the Lamp of
Balthi, the River-maidens and the Werewolf of Mirkwood:
Loremasters should refresh their memory of that material
before continuing.

The Loremaster can use the information contained in
this section in any way he sees fit, as plot hooks to be
developed, to add depth and perspective to the deeds of
the player-heroes during an Adventuring phase or to keep
the company up to date with the passing of major events
affecting the land during a Fellowship phase.
Adventuring Phase: This section typically contains one
sample adventure for the company to embark upon. A
measure of customisation is required, especially as the
actual play campaign progresses and the actions of the
player-heroes affect and alter the history of Wilderland.

A Chronology of Wilderland

Loremasters are strongly encouraged to modify the plot
elements or change the location of a sample adventure, or
even to substitute key characters to adapt the adventures
to their playing groups. The aim of this section is to provide
a strong foundation to build upon, not to impose a rigid
plot on everyone’s games (see also Using the Tale of Years
and Personal Stakes below).

Each year from 2947 (the first hints of the returning
shadow) to 2977 (the death of King Bard) is described
individually, in the following format:
Year: The current game year.

4

Introduction

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End: Here are listed any special
Fellowship phase undertakings or other circumstances
that affect the final Fellowship phase for the year. Some of
the later years may not offer a specific entry, as it becomes
more and more difficult to foresee what the companions

might do in their spare time. Loremasters should remember
that it is especially during the Year’s End Fellowship phase
that the occurrences described in the Events entries prove
particularly effective to let the players feel the history of
Middle-earth unfold before them.

News from Afar
Outside of the Shire, there is no postal service in Middle-earth, and certainly no newspapers. And while it seems that

Elves can spread or gather information "as quick as water flows, or quicker", they rarely share what they know
with other folks. More often than not, tidings go far and wide only through the gossip of wandering merchants

and in the close-mouthed grumblings of travelling Dwarves, and may even become difficult to separate from wild
tales and distorted rumours.

Without the intervention of envoys or messengers, it might take one full year, sometimes more, for characters
in Wilderland to learn of events happening elsewhere in the region, and from 2 to 5 years for news from outside
Wilderland to reach them, and at least 3 to 8 years for news out of the South, East or West.

Characters with a suitable Lore speciality may be able to get news faster, or have access to better sources.
Furthermore, many powerful individuals either have their own networks of informants and messengers, or else have

some way of getting information quickly. Radagast, for example, has his flocks of birds; Beorn has his animals
and can travel swiftly by night – but even a Wizard must go in search of rumours and news. In Middle-earth, miles
are miles, and someone has to cross them to bring word from afar.

5

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Running the Campaign

Not everything contained here will suit every campaign,
and Loremasters should not attempt to have their players
witness or take part in every single occurrence described.
If the year’s main’ events are in Southern Mirkwood, and
the players are currently in the Woodland Realm, there
is no need to force them to travel the length of Mirkwood
– either run another adventure, or let them simply hear
later about what transpired.

Should the Darkening of Mirkwood become the story told
in The Lord of the Rings and its appendixes, it will be the
telling of a long defeat for the Free Folks of the North. The
Shadow returns to the forest, and Dol Guldur is restored.
By the time of the War of the Ring, Mirkwood is again a
place of horror. The Woodmen are barely mentioned and
may be scattered or destroyed, Beorn is dead, Radagast
gone and the Woodland Realm is isolated.

Personal Stakes

Even heroes can hardly avert this fate – all the odds are
against them. But there is something they can certainly
do: they can fight to hold back the darkness for another
day, another month, maybe another year. Their plight
may be considered desperate, even hopeless, but they will
at least save something from the inevitable doom.

The campaign works best if the players have a stake in
Mirkwood. Ideally, most of the heroes come from the Free
Folk who live in or around the forest – either Woodmen,
Silvan Elves or Beornings. Characters from foreign
cultures should be given a personal reason to care about
what happens to the forest and to keep them close to the
action.

For these reasons, the emphasis of the Darkening of
Mirkwood should be on personal tragedy. The forest
may be lost, but can the heroes save their own families
and friends from slavery and death? Can they preserve
the treasures kept by the Woodmen? Can they salvage
something from the ruin? They may not live to see the
downfall of the Enemy, but they can save the North from
his malice and give hope to the future.

The companions are the heroes of the campaign. That does
not mean they must be stronger than Beorn or wiser than
Radagast, nor does it mean that Loremaster characters
do not have weight – it means that every game session
should be about what the heroes do, about their part in
the fight against the Enemy. If Beorn defeats an army of
Goblins, it should be the epic consequence of the playerheroes’ infiltration into the caves under the Mountains of
Mirkwood to find the lost Sceptre of Oropher.

Using the Tale of Years
Among other things, the Loremaster’s Guide for The One
Ring elaborates why players should not be intimidated
by what some recognise as a ‘Tolkien canon‘ (pages 8
and 9). They should not feel limited by the Tale of Years
offered in this guide either, and for very similar reasons:
Middle-earth historians can be wrong, rumours are often
mistaken for truth and what is written may not be what
actually came to pass.

Holdings
The rules for creating and running a holding (page 8) give
the players something of their own to build and protect.
They make a character part of the setting – and they are
wonderful leverage for the Loremaster to use. If Spiders
attack a Woodman village, that’s a tragedy for the heroes
to avenge – but if the village includes a farm that is part of
a hero’s holding, then it’s personal.

When considering the events described in this guide for
inclusion in their own game, Loremasters are encouraged
to customise the facts and adventures presented herein,
to the point of altering or discarding them altogether, to
replace with new ones of their own devising.

Moreover, holdings may put heroes in a difficult position
where they are forced to choose between their own
interests and the common good: what will a hero choose
when faced with the option of remaining faithful to an
important quest, or return home to protect his own?

This guide is filled with plot elements that are meant to be
woven together with the deeds of the players, not a rigid
script for them to play through.

Kin & Hearth
When Bilbo Baggins went There and Back Again, the worst
he had to contend with at home with was the Sackville6

Introduction

The Passing Years

Bagginses stealing his spoons. Frodo went to Mordor and
returned to find the Shire wounded, but he still left a place
of comfort and safety to travel far into danger. Most of the
characters in The Darkening of Mirkwood do not have the
same luxury. For heroes native to Wilderland, danger is
not over the Misty Mountains and far away – it is right
outside their door. What is threatened by the growing
Shadow are their homes and their way of life.

The Darkening of Mirkwood spans thirty years, longer
than the time most heroes spend adventuring (see
Adventuring Career, page 119 of the Loremaster’s Guide).
From the start of the campaign, players should have one
eye on the future. Bardings, Beornings, Woodmen and
even Hobbit heroes are encouraged to get married, settle
down, have children, and eventually hand over their
weapons to their sons and daughters.

When it is the case, the Loremaster should encourage the
players to describe where they live, who are the important
personalities of their folk and which stories are told in
their home culture. Over the course of the campaign, the
players should be offered the chance to become leaders in
their communities, marry and have children, make friends
and allies. Then, with a kin and a hearth to defend, it will
be easy for the Loremaster to threaten all they stand for.

Dwarves and Elves should set their aim on similarlytermed goals, such as the foundation of a settlement,
the hoarding of treasure, the recovery of a long-lost
heirloom, all for the greater glory of their folk or to pass
along to a worthy heir.
During play, the Loremaster can remind the players of the
unfolding of time in more effective ways than just listing
the passing of year after year. New villages get founded,
grow, and then disappear, victim to Orcs or plague or
some other disaster. Loremaster characters enter the
heroes’ lives, then disappear and are forgotten, or age
and die; villains start off as strong young warriors and
end as aged tyrants. Mirkwood is a living forest, and
sometimes nothing more than describing yet another turn
of the colour of its leaves or the first snowfall is needed to
summon the feeling of time flowing ever on.

Personal threats can take many forms in the Darkening of
Mirkwood. Orcs come down from the mountains to raid
villages, Spiders lurk in the shadows, and the dead walk
in the woods. Then, there are subtler threats, but no less
dangerous; a dark power corrupts and rots all that is good
and wholesome, sowing dissent among the Woodman
clans, the Elves turn their backs on the world, and oncetrusted allies fall prey to fear, despair or even turn to the
Shadow.

Light & Dark

As Mirkwood grows darker, the heroes should see the
world becoming more hostile and perilous with each
passing year.

The plot elements described in the Adventuring Phase
entries are not detailed as other published adventures
(and become more and more so as the Tale of Years
progresses). Loremasters should look at them as starting
points and suggestions, to be customised around their
playing groups.

A very simple metaphor runs through the entire campaign
– light and darkness are equated with good and evil.
Dark places are bad, dangerous and home to evil things;
sunshine, open fires and blazing lamps are good. A
brightly lit place is a safe haven. The Loremaster would do
good to play up this symbolism – hope should be kindled
with flaming torches, dark times be announced by the
coming of black clouds, the company should meet allies in
sunlit clearings, and face down foes in the shadows below
the trees.

Where possible, the Loremaster should link the events of
the adventure directly to the companions. If an adventure
mentions a kidnap victim, it should be one of the
companions’ kin or friends. If an adventure has a villain,
it should be replaced with a recurring foe that the players
really hate!

This balance of light and darkness can also be used to
mark the current state of things in Mirkwood. If, by the
company’s actions, the Elves of Mirkwood become more
insular and wayward, then the halls of King Thranduil
may be described as lit by flickering candles and full of
ghostly shadows. If, conversely, the companions rally the

Customising the Adventures

7

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Elves and bring hope to the forest, then their sanctuaries
blaze with the glare of magical lamps, reflected off
the rocky ceilings like a heaven of shining stars above.
Absolute despair comes with absolute darkness.

Not every adventurer has a holding; a truant Hobbit
far from the Shire or a merry Elf might not have any
responsibilities or commitments.
There are many ways for a hero to come into possession
of a holding. For example, a lucky hero might inherit a
holding from a wealthy family member. Typically, a
companion gains a holding as the result of an adventure,
perhaps as a gift, or perhaps by finding an unoccupied
holding and taking possession of it.

Rules for Holdings
‘He lives in an oakwood and has a great wooden
house; and as a man he keeps cattle and horses…’

Holdings table:

Over the course of the campaign, heroes may come into
possession of a holding. A holding might be a business, like
a smithy or a tavern. It might be a farm, or the companion
might own land that is tilled by peasants who rent the land
and give the character a portion of each harvest. Holdings
do not need to be limited to strictly physical possessions –
a Woodman’s home and family might together constitute
a holding.
A holding represents the hero’s main occupation when he
is not adventuring. Bag End might be considered part of
a holding belonging to Bilbo Baggins (and later, Frodo);
Sam’s gardening job there would also be a holding (of less
value).

Minimum

Rating

Description

9

Modest

1

Trapper’s
cabin

8

Adequate

2

Farm, cottage

7

Respectable

3

Small inn,
mansion

6

Superior

4

Rich hunting
ground, large
inn

5

Thriving

5

Iron mine

4

Opulent

6

Gold mine,
large estate

score

Example

Rating
The value of a holding is measured in gaming terms by
a numerical rating, ranging from 4 to 9. This value is
comparable to the Target Number for an action, in the
sense that a low number is preferable to a high number
(see below). A poor farm on a rocky hillside might have a
rating of 9; a rich farm in the fertile Anduin valley might
have a rating of 6.

Minimum Score
Heroes cannot own a holding unless they possess a
minimum score in an appropriate characteristic. The
rating of a holding is limited by a character’s Standing if it
is found within the borders of a hero’s homeland, while it
is limited by a hero’s Valour score if it is located anywhere
else (owning property beyond one’s station is seen as
unusual and rather suspect almost anywhere).
8

Introduction

of land), it earns Treasure equal to the difference
between the roll and the rating.

Specialities
A character who owns a holding may profit from having a
matching Speciality – an innkeeper should learn Cooking,
a Hunter Beast-Lore and so on (see the Tend to Holding
Fellowship phase undertaking, below).

For example, if a player rolls a 9 on a holding rated 6, he
earns three Treasure that year.

Running a Holding

•

The mundane affairs of running a business – planting
crops, mining ore, forging tools and so on – can be ignored
in the game; it is assumed that the character has the
requisite skills, or can employ someone who does. What
is important to determine is how a holding may change
over the course of the years, and what fruits does it bear.

.
•

Holdings Upkeep
In the course of the last Fellowship phase of each year
(Year’s End) all players whose heroes have a holding must
make a roll using the Feat die.
•

If the result is C, then the holding suffers some
disaster or misfortune. If the hero does not take action
in the next Fellowship phase, the holding may be
destroyed or have its rating increased.

For example, a farm might be damaged by flooding or bad
weather; an inn might be attacked by raiders, a gold mine
might be taken over from below by Goblins.

If the roll result is equal to or less than the holding’s
rating, then the holding produces just enough wealth
to keep the character at his Standard of Living.

New Fellowship Phase Undertaking:
Tend to Holding

If the Loremaster deems it appropriate to the current
circumstances, a result of 1 or 2 may be interpreted to
mean that the character’s holding does not produce
enough to cover his living expenses, forcing the hero to
spend stored Treasure to maintain his Standard of Living.
•

If the result is A, then good fortune strikes the hero! He
gains no extra Treasure, but prospers in some other
way – a sick child recovers, an old feud is settled,
the weather is unusually pleasant. The rating for the
holding is permanently lowered by 1 (to a minimum
of 3)

A character may spend a Year’s End Fellowship phase

tending to his holding by choosing this undertaking.

If he does so, he may roll the Feat die twice and

choose the best result when determining the conditions

If the result is greater than the rating, then the
character does not only attain his appropriate
Standard of Living but, if the holding is a property
capable of producing wealth (such as an inn, or tracts

of his property. If the hero possesses an appropriate
Speciality, he additionally gains an Advancement
point.

aB
9

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

the Tale of years
B

The Last Good Years (2947-2950) – Page 11
The Return of the Shadow (2951-2960) – Page 24
The Gathering Gloom (2961-2966) – Page 64
The Years of the Plague (2967-2974) – Page 84
The Darkening of Mirkwood (2975-2977) – Page 116

10

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

The Last Good Years:

to ally his followers living in the East Bight with the
Woodmen, his distant kin. The elders agree to hear his
request, and a folk-moot is arranged for the midsummer
of the following year at Rhosgobel.

These are the last years before the return of the Shadow.
The Woodmen multiply, but they must deal with the
scattered minions of Dol Guldur. In the north, the Elves
savour again the joy of living under the dark boughs of the
forest, but are later troubled by the Werewolf of Mirkwood
and quarrel with the folk of Dale.

The companions may meet these messengers, or be sent
to the East Bight with the reply of the elders. After several
years of peace, the howl of the Werewolf of Mirkwood is
again heard in the forest. It attacks a party of Dwarves
from Erebor after they foolishly stray from the Elf-path.

2947-2950

Adventuring Phase:
The Wizard’s Man

Year 2947
Events

While out hunting or travelling near Rhosgobel, the
companions encounter a wounded man. He stumbles
towards them, his face pale as a ghost, yellow-flecked spit
welling up from the corners of his mouth. He was waylaid
by Spiders in the woods, and their poison courses through
his veins. He presses a crumpled note into the character’s
hands before falling unconscious.

Gollum passes through Mirkwood. The wretched creature
crosses the Long Marshes just south of the Elf-path, then
makes his way south-west, skirting away from any danger.
In the autumn, he crosses into the Western Eaves, and
survives by preying on the unwary and those who are too
weak to defend themselves.

Any Woodman companion hailing from Mirkwood (or
anyone possessing the Trait Mirkwood-lore) recognise him
as Beran the Watchful; he is a Woodman, and is known as
one of Radagast’s informants and watchmen.

Ceawin the Generous (Heart of the Wild, page 103) sends
messengers to Woodmen-town, Rhosgobel and Woodland
Hall, asking for the clan elders to hear his plea. He wants

11

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

health. If the company surrender or flee, she lets them go.
If the companions hand Beran over, then Dagmar and her
followers vanish into the forest with the wounded man. He
is never seen again.

The note he carries warns that Beran saw Orcs in Fenbridge
Castle, one of the outlying fortifications of Dol Guldur (Heart
of the Wild, page 108). A scrawled map notes the position
of Fenbridge, and also marks a tower near the Narrows
of the Forest (the Tyrant’s Hill). The Enemy abandoned the
castle after the White Council drove the Necromancer from
Dol Guldur, but now the Orcs have returned.

If the companions insist on bringing Beran to Rhosgobel,
then Dagmar offers to accompany them. “These woods
are dangerous”, she says, “Spiders and worse things draw
near.” On the way there, Dagmar looks for an opportunity
to recapture Beran and the note. She might even attack the
company as they sleep. If the heroes refuse Dagmar’s offer,
then she and her men follow them through the woods; if
they are unable to escape her, she ambushes them before
they reach Rhosgobel. By then, her frustration is enough
to drive her to kill.

The Hand of Mogdred
Soon after Beran meets the company, a group of six armed
warriors emerge from the forest, accompanied by as
many huge snarling wolfhounds. They are clad not unlike
the Woodmen of Mirkwood, but do not bear the marks of
any known clan. They wear mail shirts, and carry helms
and shields on their back, but it is clear that they are not
looking for a fight.

Servants of the Tyrant’s Hill

The leader of the group steps forward: she’s a lean, broadshouldered Northman woman, with dark hair streaked
with white. She announces herself as Dagmar, servant of
the Tyrant’s Hill. Pointing at the poisoned man, she claims
that Beran stole something from her, and arrogantly
demands that he should be handed over to them. If
questioned, Dagmar identifies herself as a free huntress of
the forest, a follower of Mogdred, the Lord of the Hill. Her
master, she tells them, claims the southern forest as his
realm, and is a Woodman born of Mirkwood. She insists
that they are friends to the Woodmen, but her demeanour
says otherwise.

These are cruel men who once served the Necromancer
of Dol Guldur, but are now sworn to Mogdred. Some
were Woodmen, but many come from the Vales of
Anduin or further away. They are well-trained warriors,
and carry better arms and equipment than is common
in the North.

Attribute Level
3

Dagmar is lying – she captured Beran in the woods, and
forcibly escorted him to the Tyrant’s Hill. Beran escaped
but blundered into a Spider-web. Mogdred wants to
keep news of the Orcs from the Woodmen for as long as
possible, until he decides which side to support.

Endurance

Hate

16

3

Parry

Armour

4 + 2 (Shield)

2d + 2

Skills
Personality, 2

Survival, 3

Movement, 2

Custom, 1

Perception, 2

Vocation, 3

Weapon Skills

If the companions point out the letter, Dagmar offers to
bring Beran to Rhosgobel and deliver it personally.

Sword

3

Savage Hound

3

Special Abilities
Beast-tamer

Dealing with Dagmar
If the companions choose to fight Dagmar, use the statistics
for Servants of the Tyrant’s Hill, below. The warriors
fight until reduced to half their starting Endurance or
wounded, and then retreat. Dagmar does not want to kill
the companions – Mogdred does not want to antagonise
his neighbours – but neither is she overly solicitous of their

No Quarter

Beast-tamer. A servant may spend 1 point of Hate to
make one supplementary attack, using the Savage Hound
skill score. Additionally, when a hero scores a Piercing
Blow, the Loremaster may choose to eliminate one hound
to cancel it. Each servant controls one hound.
12

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

honour and a little suspicion – where the Grey Pilgrim
goes, trouble follows. If Gandalf meets the company, he
asks them questions about their rulers. Unless impressed
greatly to the contrary, he resolves not to invite anyone to
the White Council, not to compromise the fragile alliance
that the North seems to be enjoying. He ends his journey
in Rhosgobel, where he rests for a few days and confers
with his fellow Wizard.

Weapons:
Weapon

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

Sword

5

C

16

Disarm

Savage Hound

4

C

14

-

type

At Rhosgobel

Representatives from all the houses of the Woodmen
gather at Rhosgobel to hear Ceawin the Generous. See The
Folk-moot at Rhosgobel, below.

At Rhosgobel, the company meet Radagast, who is deeply
concerned by news of the Orcs at Fenbridge. He has been
keeping a close watch over the ruins of Dol Guldur and
the other outlying fortresses, and hoped that Mirkwood
would enjoy a long time of peace before evil returned to
the wood.

Trespassers from Dale enter the Woodland Realm and
cut down trees, including some silver beeches that are
especially beloved of the Elves.

If the company wish, they can try to gain Radagast as a
patron (see page 115 of the Loremaster’s Guide).

Una, a young merchant princess from Dorwinion, leaves
her court in early summer to visit Dale for diplomatic
reasons. A detachment of Barding warriors (possibly
including the companions) is sent by King Bard to meet her
caravan along the Running River; they reach the merchant
convoy just in time to discourage a band of raiders from
the East that was following them. When the princess
finally arrives in Dale, everyone witnesses how King Bard
is captivated by the sight of Una’s dancing during the feast
held in her honour.

The Lord of the Tyrant’s Hill
The companions may wish to know more about Mogdred,
the so-called Lord of the Tyrant’s Hill (Heart of the Wild,
page 107). According to rumour, he commands many
well-equipped warriors, and claims part of Southern
Mirkwood and the Narrows as his domain. Some of the
settlements in the southern vales pay him tribute. No one
among his followers knows where Mogdred comes from,
but his tower was once inhabited by Orcs and Men who
bore the sigil of the Necromancer.

Adventuring Phase:
The Folk-moot at Rhosgobel

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

Representatives from all the Houses of the Woodmen
come to Rhosgobel at midsummer. This gathering also
brings merchants and traders from far afield. Envoys and
guests from other Free Folk are also welcome to attend the
folk-moot, where many matters relating to the Woodmen
are debated (characters who are not Woodmen may be
given special missions or assignments by their rulers to
bring up at the gathering).

This is one of the last good years before the Shadow
returns – when rolling for the upkeep of a holding, add 2
to the roll result.

Year 2948
Events

Notable people present:

Gandalf travels across Wilderland, with the intention
of inviting one of the rulers of the North to become a
member of the White Council. He visits the courts of
Elves, Dwarves and Men, and is generally received with

•

13

Ingomer, of the House of Woodland Hall: Ingomer
Axebreaker is the head of the council of elders of
Woodland Hall (Heart of the Wild, page 92); he has

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

go to Radagast for counsel, they turn to old Fridwald.
With him is his nephew Munderic, a lazy boy of ten
who Fridwald is vainly trying to convince to be a
messenger for the Woodmen too.

the loudest voice in the folk-moot and keeps order in
the meeting. Ingomer greets the companions as they
enter; he announces to the gathering any Woodman
hero with a Standing rating of 3 or more, and any
adventurer with a Valour score of 3 or more.
•

•

Hartfast, of the House of Mountain Hall: Old and
quarrelsome, Hartfast son of Hartmut is the chieftain
of Mountain Hall. Unlike the other Woodmen, the
strange folk of the hall always elect a chieftain to rule
them and protect them from the Orcs of the Misty
Mountains.
Fridwald the Runner, of the House of Woodmentown: Fridwald is a wiry old man who serves as chief
messenger and runner between the three Woodmen
settlements of Mirkwood since too many years to
count. Despite his advanced age, he is still hale and
hardy, and knows the paths of the forest better than
anyone else. When the folk of Woodmen-town do not

•

Radagast the Brown: By ancient tradition, the
Wizard attends all folk-moots as an honoured friend.
Radagast says little, preferring to sit in a corner and
amuse the children with his magical dancing mice.

•

Amaleoda, Shieldmaiden of the Black Tarn: in
charge of her family since her father’s death, Amaleoda
and her kin live on the western shore of the Black Tarn.
They are fishers and hunters. Of the Woodmen, they
live closest to the Shadow of Dol Guldur.

Special guests:
•

14

Ceawin the Generous: Golden-haired Ceawin is the
young leader of a band of settlers in the East Bight,

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

•

on the far side of Mirkwood. Most of his followers are
distant kin to the Woodmen.

his people need to learn how to survive in Mirkwood, and
offers friendship and wealth in exchange.

Bofri, son of Bofur: The Dwarf visits the folk-moot in
search of brave warriors and scouts who can help him
explore the remains of the Old Forest Road (Heart of
the Wild, page 84).

The response to Ceawin’s speech is divided. Some are
suspicious of newcomers; others, like Hartfast of Mountain
Hall, recognise the wisdom of his request. Firienseld is,
after all, even further from Woodmen-town than the East
Bight, and they are counted among the Woodmen.

Before the folk-moot begins, the company can meet
friends, gather rumours or speak with Radagast. They may
hear tell of recent events, learn old stories like the tale of
Balthi, rumours about the River-maidens, or learn of the
loss of Ingomer’s son in the forest. Ceawin’s followers are
everywhere, offering gifts of food, drink and gold to win
support.

Just before Ingomer calls for the vote, one of Ragadast’s
birds flaps down and lands on the Wizard’s shoulder,
cawing frantically. A moment later, the sound of horns
echoes out of the wood.

The Prodigal Son
A dozen riders emerge quietly from the shadow of the
trees. If the companions played through The Wizard’s
Man (page 11), they recognise the garb of the men of the
Tyrant’s Hill. All are armed, and their weapons seem both
well-made and well-used. Two of them have big sacks tied
to the back of their mounts. At their head rides a dread
figure, wearing a helm made in the likeness of a dragon.

At first, the folk-moot deals with trivial matters. The
assembled elders discuss trade between their Houses and
their allies. The traders of Mountain Hall complain about
the tolls requested by the Beornings; the folk of Woodmentown ask for more iron and tin; foreign merchants come
to sell swords and spear-heads made by Dwarves in the
north.

“Only Woodmen and their friends are welcome here,”
declares Ingomer.

Next, the folk of the Black Tarn speak. Amaleoda says that
the recent years brought wonderful harvests, that the lake
is alive with fish, and the pestilent fogs that sometimes
blew up from the south are gone. The Maiden of the Lake
welcomes their presence. They invite more of the Woodmen
to come south with them to the Black Tarn, for they intend
to raise a longhouse and build a larger walled settlement.
The Woodmen greet this prospect with enthusiasm, but
Ingomer raises his hands for silence.

The stranger removes his helm. “But I am a Woodman,
by blood and birth. Don’t you recognise me? You called
me Ingold, your son, though men now call me Mogdred.”
Shaken, Ingomer sits down.

Ceawin Speaks

Mogdred address the crowd. “For many years, I was a slave
in the dungeons of the Necromancer! Now I am lord of the
place you call the Tyrant’s Hill, and I command many men.”
He points his sword at Amaleoda. “You and yours would be
long dead if it were not for our protection. Darkness returns
to the forest, had you but eyes to see it. There are Orcs in
Fenbridge, and shadows stir in Dol Guldur.”

Ceawin the Generous climbs up on a platform to address
the crowd. “For those who do not know me,” and here he
addresses himself chiefly to Hartfast, “my people dwell
in the East Bight of Mirkwood.” Ceawin lists the virtues
of the East Bight – the soil is fertile, it is close to the rich
lands of Dale and Dorwinion, and it was the home of the
Northmen of old. He has many followers and a sturdy
longhouse. He asks to be counted among the Woodmen –

A warrior in the crowd wants to know what Mogdred asks
of this folk-moot. He responds with scorn, “A seat in the
councils of the Woodmen, tribute from the Black Tarn,
wives for my warriors, gold from the mountains. That
stranger -” he points at Ceawin the Generous, “offered you
trinkets and sweetcakes. My offer is of a more practical
sort.”

“One not of our people – though a kin from afar – asked to
speak here. Come forth, Ceawin.”

15

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The Woodmen are divided on this proposal, but more are
against Mogdred than support him.

His two followers up-end the sacks they brought with
them. Dozens of Orc-heads tumble from them. “What say
you?” he demands arrogantly.

If the players wish, they can speak in support or against
any of the proposals. A successful Awe, Courtesy, Inspire
or even Song roll can rally opinion. The difficulty of any
roll made to change opinions about Ceawin or Mogdred
should be set at the default level (TN 14), while it is much
harder to instill doubts about the proposal of Amaleoda
(TN 18).

The Debate
The Woodmen must choose how to respond. There are
three proposals before them:
•

Welcome Ceawin’s people into the Woodmen: On the
one hand, they are wealthy and an alliance with them
would make the Woodmen stronger. On the other,
Ceawin is a stranger, and the East Bight is far away –
if Orcs have come back to Southern Mirkwood, then
maintaining trade with the East Bight will be perilous.

After some time, Ingomer calls for a vote.

Judgement of the Folk-moot
The decisions made here have repercussions long into the
future:

Opinion on Ceawin’s proposal is divided roughly evenly
among the Woodmen, but on balance they are currently
in favour of it.
•

Build a new village by the Black Tarn (Black Tarn Hall):
Amaleoda’s folk are prospering, and establishing
a new House would strengthen the Woodmen as a
whole. The Black Tarn is rich in fish, and they have
the friendship of the River-maidens.

Proposal

Accepted

Rejected

Ceawin

Over the next few
years, several
Woodmen families
move to the East
Bight to settle there.
Ceawin names his
main settlement the
Sunstead, and it
prospers for several
years.

Ceawin returns
empty-handed and
angry. His people
rapidly dwindle as
many flee the forest
to the safer land of
the Bardings to the
north.

Amaleoda

Any Woodmen who
wish to settle by the
lake are welcomed
in Black Tarn Hall.
Many people from
Woodmen-town and
Rhosgobel go east to
help its building.

Shocked and
surprised, the
shieldmaiden
returns home to the
lake. Her people
continue to grow in
numbers, but more
and more of them
turn to Mogdred’s
men for protection.

Mogdred

Mogdred’s men
help protect
the Woodmen’s
southern border,
but they cause lots
of trouble. There
is bitter fighting
between the Orcs of
Fenbridge Castle
and the warriors of
the Tyrant’s Hill.

Angered, Mogdred
returns to his
fortress. His
warriors become
raiders, attacking
the Woodmen
settlements and
making travel
through the
forest even more
dangerous.

Virtually everyone supports Amaleoda on principle, but
some fear that the new village is too close to the dangers
of the south.
•

Welcome the Lord of the Tyrant’s Hill into the
Woodmen: Mogdred’s sudden appearance at the
conclave means that few people are sure what to think.
He strongly implied a threat - “If you’re not my friends,
then you’re my enemies, and you already have more
enemies than you know” - and that was not the act of
a kind man. He demanded tribute instead of asking
for friendship, and seemed to consider the Black Tarn
part of his domain. However, is it not better to have his
warriors as allies instead of enemies? If the Woodmen
refuse Mogdred, then he could threaten both a new
Black Tarn village and anyone travelling to the East
Bight. Also, he is Ingomer’s son, and Ingomer was a
good leader. His son clearly suffered in the dungeons,
and he is not very polite, but is that a good reason to
reject him?
16

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

Tensions with the Barding villages along the eastern
border of the Woodland Realm continue, as the Bardings
trespass into the lands of the Elves.

If both Amaleoda’s and Mogdred’s proposals were
accepted, the two Houses watch each other suspiciously. If
the Woodmen support Ceawin or Amaleoda (or both), but
reject Mogdred, then the new Woodman settlements are
virtually cut off by the men of Tyrant’s Hill, and travelling
to those areas becomes dangerous.

Balin and Gandalf visit Bilbo in the Shire. On the way, they
speak of Moria and Balin begins dreaming of a return to
that lost city.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

Adventuring Phase:
The Questing Beasts

Companions spending the Fellowship phase in Dale or
Esgaroth hear news of how King Bard is wooing fair Una
of Dorwinion. Barding heroes of sufficient Standing may
even play an important part in the king’s betrothal as
amorous intermediaries, if they wish to intervene and be
involved.

For many years, King Thranduil has hunted the fabled
white deer of Mirkwood, a race of enchanted beasts known
to roam all of the forest. They are rarely seen, and some
consider their appearance to foreshadow portentous
events. Recently, hunters have spotted the creatures in
Northern Mirkwood, and the Elvenking has called for a
royal hunt.

Year 2949
Events

Normally, only Elves of the Woodland Realm would be
invited to participate in such a hunt, but the Elvenking
declares that mortals may participate if they are friends
of the realm. A few Woodmen and warriors from Dale
and Lake-town are allowed to join in the hunt. If the
heroes have good relations with the Woodland Realm,
or have Thranduil as a patron, they receive invitations.
Alternatively, if the characters have a different patron,
then he may ask them to represent him at Thranduil’s
hunt.

Early this year, King Bard marries Una of Dorwinion.
The bond reinforces the status of the kingdom of Dale as
a rising power in the North, as Una comes with a rich
dowry of gold and diplomatic relations. In December,
Una gives birth to a male son, Prince Bain, making Bard a
father at the age of 38.
Spiders attack a Woodman boat travelling down the Dusky
River. The River-maidens intercede to save the Woodmen
by guiding them out of the webs. One of the Woodmen
reports seeing a gigantic Spider lurking in the shadows.

The hunt begins at the Elvenking’s Halls, then ranges out
to the north and west. Thranduil and some of the Elves
ride grey horses that seem to magically slip through the
thickets and undergrowth without impediment, but most
hunters are on foot. The hunt may take many weeks to
complete, as the white deer wander far into Northern
Mirkwood.

Gollum lingers on the fringes of the Western Eaves,
stealing food from the Woodmen. One farmer tries to
catch the chicken-thief; Gollum retaliates by terrifying
the farmer’s cows, who trample the Woodman to death.
Ingomer of Woodland Hall puts a bounty on the head of
this ’Bloody Ghost’.

Ruithel
One of the hunters who sets out at the same time as the
companions is an Elf-maiden named Ruithel, famed as
a huntress and a tracker. She wields one of the treasures
of the Woodland Realm, the bow Penbregol, strung with
mithril by the Dwarf-smith Gamil Zirak in the depths of
time. Ruithel was recently promoted to command the

Beorn visits Northern Mirkwood, and meets with the
Elves. King Thranduil sends emissaries to meet with him.
Elven heroes of high Standing who have good relations
with the Beornings may be included in this mission.
17

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

As an option, the Loremaster may choose to run The Pit of
the Exiled Dwarves (below) while the company is on the
hunt. A white deer might even lead the heroes to Ruithel in
her time of need.

guards who watch the Elf-path and the borders of the
Realm, and is eager to prove herself worthy of the office
and the bow that comes with it.
Ruithel laughs at any mortal hunters. Mirkwood has been
her home for more than two thousand years; how can
they call themselves hunters and woodwise when they
have not watched these mighty oaks leap up young and
green in the spring of the world? She also speaks softly
but coldly about the humans who trespassed in the east of
the Realm, and how they will be punished if they lay axe
to tree again.

If a hero brings a white deer down, he is feasted and
féted at Thranduil’s Hall; this is certainly a deed worth
of an increase in Standing for a Silvan Elf, and of a gift of
Treasure for any other hero (worth five points).

Killing a Hart in Mirkwood
In The Hobbit , Thorin Oakenshield shoots an arrow

The Bow of Sudden Fury

into a leaping hart just before the company encounters

Penbregol is a bow with an Edge rating of 8.

the white hind and her fawns (it is possible that the

Additionally, it is a Woodland Bow ( Adventurer’s

dark hart was the male companion of the snow-white

Guide, page 139) and thus its wielder is always

hind). Moments later, Bombur falls into the waters

allowed to make one additional opening volley, even

of the Enchanted River…

when no opening volleys are allowed (unless surprised).

If the Loremaster likes the idea, he may have a hero

hunting the white deer find a dark stag instead,

Hunting the White Deer

guarding his mate and young (following the rules
described above). If the hart is killed everyone gains

The white deer are somewhere in Northern Mirkwood.
When the Loremaster finds it to be convenient, the
creatures are spotted by scouts somewhere near the
company and the chase is on (if the Loremaster prefers
a random method, he may roll a Success die for every
three days of hunt - a roll of 6 indicates that a deer is
close by).

a Shadow point, AND something really bad happens!
Examples include: a miserable hero suffers a bout of

madness, a companion has a riding accident, the noise
of the hunt rouses the unwanted attention of a whole
Spider colony, and so on.

Each companion is allowed a Hunting roll each day to
find a trail. A success means that the hero can roll again
the following day and the day after - three successful
tests in a row brings a hero within sight of a white deer
(a great success equates to two successful tests, and an
extraordinary success to three successful tests).

The Pit of the Exiled Dwarves

A companion who spots a white deer encounters a single
animal, or maybe a hind with fawns, as they stand
glimmering in the shadows – a hero has just enough time
to let loose an arrow (any other action sees the animals
turn and vanish silently in the forest). The difficulty to
shoot a deer is TN 18: a Piercing blow kills the animal; any
other result bloodies it, but the creature disappears in the
darkness of Mirkwood.

At the bottom of the pit, keen-eyed companions (or
whoever passes an Awareness test) spot a silvery glimmer
in the murky green light: it is the precious bow Penbregol!
Something must have happened to Ruithel.

While travelling through Northern Mirkwood, the
company comes across a strange sight – a deep pit cut into
the forest floor, opening among the thick roots and fallen
leaves. The pit was obviously concealed in the underbrush
until recently.

A moment later, a pair of hooded Dwarves emerge from a
concealed door in the side of what appears to be a dead
tree, but is actually a cunningly carved entrance to their
18

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

will ransom Ruithel once Frár arrives, but that may take
many weeks. If they must, they let the heroes get her bow
in exchange for their silence.

underground lair. They do not approach the company,
but watch them warily. The two introduce themselves as
the brothers Polin and Pomin, exiles from the vanished
Greydelve. They claim that this region is their home,
and that the companions are trespassing. If asked about
Ruithel, they admit the Elf is in their custody: they claim
that she cut the beard from their chieftain Frár the
Beardless (Heart of the Wild, page 22 - this is actually an
unfortunate misunderstanding; it was Guilin, the former
holder of Ruithel’s office that shaved Frár.

Saving Ruithel
There are several possible ways for the company to rescue
Ruithel. They could try to gain entrance to the Dwarves’
dwelling and fight their way past them. They could
negotiate. The Dwarves want two things – revenge and
help reclaiming their former home, the Greydelve, from
the Orcs. Negotiating with the two brothers is tricky, as
both are half-mad. They can also try to trick or threaten
the Dwarves into giving up the Elf, but this will result in
their perpetual enmity.

The two Dwarves recognised the famous bow and assumed
that Ruithel was responsible.)

If the company can engineer a peaceful resolution, then
both Ruithel and the Dwarves are in their debt. Thranduil
may even consider meeting with their chieftain Frár
and helping the Dwarves in retaking the Greydelve. If
the company leave Ruithel to her fate, she escapes the
captivity of the Dwarves several weeks later. Ever after,
she bears a grudge against mortals, and becomes
sympathetic to the beliefs of the Wayward Elves (Heart of
the Wild, page 78).

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
No changes, although those who stay at Thranduil’s Halls
after a successful hunt of the white deer regain an extra
point of Hope.

Year 2950
Events
At the instigation of Gandalf, the Elvenking dispatches
scouts to the Mountains of Mirkwood. Their mission
is to search for records or documents that might have
been hidden there when the Necromancer fled from Dol
Guldur. The scouts find nothing, but report that evil things
are stirring in the dark.

The Dwarves claim Ruithel as their prisoner, and refuse
to release her. If the company try to attack the Dwarves,
they flee back inside the hollow tree and run down the
concealed spiral staircase to the caves below. The entrance
to the hollow tree is concealed with spells of secrecy,
requiring an extraordinary success on a Search test (or a
normal success for a Dwarf) to find. The Dwarves say they

The strength of the Orcs at Fenbridge Castle grows. If
Mogdred was welcomed into the Woodmen in 2948, then
19

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

his men stop the worst attacks. Otherwise, settlements
along the Black Tarn and the East Bight are attacked by
Orcs this year. At the suggestion of Gandalf, Radagast
travels to Dol Guldur. See Secrets Buried, below.
The Woodmen continue to hunt for the ’Bloody Ghost’.
Some mutter darkly about Mogdred’s men, and blame
them for the evil.
A few of the younger Elves at a feast in the Bower (Heart
of the Wild, page 73) decide to punish the Bardings for
their trespassing. When a group of foresters next enter
the woods, the Elves harass and ensorcel them, weaving
spells around the mortals. The foresters lose their way
and wander into the depths of the forest. Three are met
by friendlier Elves and guided back to the Elf-path, but
another goes mad and dies.

Adventuring Phase: Secrets Buried
Radagast calls upon the companions for aid. If he does
not know them already, he summons them by sending a
talking squirrel to each of them; Radagast is friendly to all
the birds and beasts of the forest, and they do his errands.
His furry messenger bids the company to gather at the
docks of Woodmen-town on Midsummer’s Day.
If the companions go to the meeting-place on the appointed
day, they see a boat of strange design emerge out of the
summer mists on the dusky river. It has a high prow
decorated with the carved head of a bird, and low flanks
swept back like wooden wings. A brown sail billows from
its tall mast. Radagast stands with one hand on the tiller,
his staff resting at his feet. He welcomes the company on
board.
Radagast is going to the south shore of the Black Tarn. As
they probably know, he explains, until some years ago a
great evil was threatening to overcome Mirkwood. Then,
a council of the wise and powerful chose to act and evil
was banished.
But even the very wise sometimes fail to see the end of all
things, and something rotten might have been left to fester

in the forest. Will the companions help him to make sure
that a deeper shadow doesn’t rise to take the place of the
first?

To the Black Tarn
The journey takes only one day (and as such doesn’t
require the company to pass any Fatigue tests). The boat
seems much too big for the narrow river, but it somehow
passes through even the thickest parts of the forest without
getting caught, as if the branches parted overhead to let
the mast and sails go by. Sometimes, the heroes hear
bubbling laughter or glimpse the shape of a woman in the
water – one of the River-maidens is nearby (Heart of the
Wild, page 90).
At the Black Tarn, Radagast and the company disembark
on the south shore of the lake, far from the eyes of the
villagers of Black Tarn Hall. The Wizard leaves the
companions and climbs a green hillock rising above the
lake front some distance away. When he reaches the
top, he is met there by a tall, dark-haired, dusky-skinned
woman in a black robe. She and Radagast speak privately
for a few moments, then the Wizard returns.
Radagast explains that the lady he has spoken to is
another River-maiden, the eldest and most powerful. She
has confirmed Radagast’s darkest fears - something is
stirring in Southern Mirkwood. The companions leave the
boat and set off marching south.

From the Black Tarn to
the Tyrant’s Hill
The second part of the journey covers some thirty
miles through the Narrows of the Forest. Since they are
travelling with Radagast, the journey across Mirkwood
takes only three days of travel, and the companions must
pass a single Fatigue test at TN 16 (no Corruption test is
required).
If the men of the East Bight are allies of the Woodmen
after 2948, then the company may meet other travellers
going to or coming from the new village of Sunstead.On
the afternoon of the third day, the company spot a tall
tower rising above the tree-tops on a distant hill. Radagast
explains that it is the Tyrant’s Hill, once the northernmost

20

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

Sucking Sink-holes (Scout)
The Scout makes an Explore test; if he fails, the group
blunders into a sucking sinkhole. Each hero loses one item
of equipment (or type of items, like ’all food’ or ’all arrows’.)

outpost of Dol Guldur. Smoke climbs from many chimneys,
and the tower is clearly inhabited.
If Mogdred is an ally of the Woodmen at this time, then the
company can safely visit the tower (Heart of the Wild, page
107). Mogdred is an unwelcoming host and mistrusts the
Wizard, but he grudgingly allows them to stay. However, if
Mogdred was rejected at the folk-moot of Rhosgobel, then
the company must sneak past the vigilance of the tower. If
this fails, then Radagast decides to return to Rhosgobel –
the evil in the hearts of these folk is enough of an answer
for him. Whether the companions push on without him is
up to them.

Black Leeches (Guide)
The Guide must make a Travel test; if he fails, the company
is infested with black leeches. Removing a leech requires
a Healing test; any character who does not receive a
successful Healing test rolls a Success die and loses that
many points of Endurance.
All Things Foul (Huntsman)
The company’s food is spoiled. Radagast says that the
only thing that is safe to eat in the fens are certain berries.
Finding them requires a successful Explore test. If this
fails, the company starves; all companions see their
Endurance reduced by 2 points for every failed Fatigue
test. (In additions to normal Fatigue.)

From the Tyrant’s Hill to
the Fens of Dol Guldur
South of the Tyrant’s Hill, the journey changes dramatically.
The company are now in the haunted woods of Southern
Mirkwood, where the shadow lies heavily on the forest.
Even in midsummer, these woods are slimy and dank and
foul.

Nightmares (Any)
During the night, the companions suffer terrible
nightmares. All characters must pass a Fear test (Valour
roll vs TN 14) or become temporarily Weary for the length
of the journey.

The journey to the edge of Dol Guldur covers sixty miles
and takes ten days, as even Radagast starts to suffer from
the oppressing gloom and noxious vapours that rise in
the morning and start to dissipate only by midday - all
companions must pass two Fatigue tests at TN 18. When the
company enters the fens that surround the hill of sorcery,
every companion must start making one Corruption test
every day (for the last three days of the journey).

Grasping Hands (Any)
The characters blunder into the outer moat of Dol Guldur,
and are waylaid by grasping dead hands that rise out
of the muck. To escape, each character must pass an
Athletics test. Those who fail must roll the Feat die and
lose that many Endurance points; heroes who roll an C
suffer a Wound instead!

Once in the marshes, Radagast explains that the castle of
Fenbridge lies a short distance to the east. The Fenbridge
(Heart of the Wild, page 108) is a much easier way through
the swamp, but it is guarded by Orcs. The company can
choose to either risk a nasty encounter or to try their way
through the swamps. Braving the swamps requires a
successful Explore test (TN 20).

Into Dol Guldur
The former fortress of the Necromancer is presented on
page 108 of The Heart of the Wild. In 2950, the fortress
is empty. Exploring the lower sections, the company find
signs that a few scavenger Orcs were here recently, but
it seems they fell to quarrelling and fought each other.
Radagast warns the company not to stray far into the
ruins – they should restrict their search to the High Keep.
They are to look for any documents related to whatever
the Necromancer was planning just before he was driven
from Dol Guldur.

Possible Hazards for the fens:
Orc Patrols (Look-out)
The look-out must make an Awareness test to spot an
approaching Orc patrol. If the test fails, the company is
ambushed. If successful, they hide as the Orcs go past.
21

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Simply walking into the darkness of the keep requires a
Fear test. Those who fail their Valour roll are daunted
and are unable to steel themselves to cross the threshold.
Exploring the keep is handled as a prolonged action
(see page 22 of the Loremaster’s Guide) requiring five
successful Search rolls.

Exploring the High Keep
A dark will is focused on the companions while they

are inside the High Keep: if the characters tarry,

they will feel the effect of its malevolence. The heroes
may make a maximum number of rolls (any roll) up
to their Valour score; after that, every roll in excess

For every successful roll, the Loremaster should reveal
one of the following clues (in order) until the completion
of the search.

gains the hero a point of Shadow. If a character fails
a roll with an C in the confines of Dol Guldur, pick

one of the following results:
•

•

A Corpse. The company find the corpse of an Orc,
curled up in a corner. The brute was stabbed with a
knife and crawled off to die. The blade is still stuck
between the Orc’s ribs, and is of Elven make – it
was forged in the Woodland Realm. A Healing or
Hunting test suggests he was only killed recently
– despite the proximity of the marshes, his body is
relatively uncorrupted.

•

A Puzzling Door. The company find a heavy iron door
deep within the keep. It is open: a successful roll of
Riddle will reveal that its lock was picked only a short
while ago, while at some point long before that, some
mighty brute smashed at the door with a huge axe –
the deep scars in the iron-shod frame bear testament
to that.

Terrifying Vision: The companion has a chilling
vision of horror, and must pass a Fear test (against
TN 16) to avoid running out of the keep in terror.

•

The Shadow of the Past: The darkness weighs

heavily on the character, and they must pass a

Corruption test (TN 16) or gain two points of
Shadow.
•

Sickness: The character develops a strange,

unnatural fever that resists even the curative arts
of the Woodmen or Elves: the hero recovers from

any Endurance loss at half speed. He spends the
next Fellowship phase recovering.

22

The Last Good Years:
2947-2950

•

•

•

More Riddles. In the labyrinth of abandoned corridors
and cells beyond the iron door, the company find
several scattered parchments. It is clear that this was
once a library, and it was hastily abandoned. Some
of the documents speak of scouting missions into the
Vales of Anduin, and another has an alarmingly upto-date description of the military forces of Lake-town.
The majority of the documents are written in the
Common Tongue, but some are in Elvish and others
in the Black Speech of Mordor. Radagast cautions the
company against reading those scrolls.
A Secret Strife. In a side room, the companions find
another body. This time, the remains are those of a
Man, a fellow from Lake-town by his garb. His cloak is
caked with dried mud and blood, and his stiff fingers
press against a gaping wound in his side that was
made by the jagged Orc-sword that lies beside him. The
sequence of events is clear – the human was surprised
by the Orc, they fought, and both mortally wounded
the other. Searching his belongings reveals a pouch
of lozenge-shaped silver pennies, coins minted in the
Woodland Realm and usually employed to deal with
foreigners (60 coins, the equivalent of three points of
Treasure).
Black Treachery! Aha! Near the body is a grating in
the floor, and stuffed into this grating are a handful
of bloodstained pages. The pages are written in the
Common Speech, and describe the Woodland Realm
in considerable detail. They mention the guards along
the Elf-path and Forest River, the East Gate, and the
defences of Thranduil’s Halls. Whoever gave this

information to the Enemy clearly had an intimate
knowledge of the Woodland Realm…
Once the companions find the documents, Radagast
urges them to leave immediately. On the journey home,
he confides that their find proves that there is a traitor in
Thranduil’s Halls. The Wizard had hoped that the Woodland
Realm would continue to be a bastion against the corruption
of Mirkwood, for the Elves have never willingly served the
Enemy, but it seems that even this hope is lost.

The Secret of Dol Guldur
The spy in the Elvenking’s court is Halbrech, the
wineseller from Lake-town (see page 130). He hired a
mercenary from Esgaroth to sneak into Dol Guldur and

destroy any evidence connecting him to the Enemy. Now
that the Necromancer is gone, Halbrech hopes to put

all that behind him, also because he recently became a
father to a daughter, Hanna. He would do anything to

preserve her from harm, and to maintain his position in

Thranduil’s court (Halbrech’s dark past will resurface
many years later - see the adventure Treachery in the

Woods on page 84) .

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Radagast blesses the company after they return from Dol
Guldur. Any character who accompanied him into the
black stronghold and undertakes to Heal Corruption (see
the Adventurer’s Guide, page 172) reduces their Shadow
total by twice the usual amount.

aB
23

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The return of the
shadow:

2951-2960

Evil spirits enter Dol Guldur to reclaim the fortress for their
master. Malevolent creatures return to the forest to pledge
their allegiance. New threats rise to menace both the
Woodmen and the Silvan Elves as the ruined stronghold
of Southern Mirkwood is restored to its former strength.

Year 2951
Events

has given them. The first wraith, the Lieutenant of Dol
Guldur, remains to haunt its ruins and drive away any
intruders. For many years, the wraith drives to madness all
those who trespass into the dark stronghold. The second
wraith, the Ghost of the Forest, travels to the Mountains of
Mirkwood, gathering Orcs and Vampires. He seeks out the
Werewolf of Mirkwood and informs it that the agony that
constantly wracks its body is the result of Elven magic. The
third wraith, the Messenger of Mordor, enters the Heart of
Mirkwood and addresses the Parliament of Spiders (Heart
of the Wild, page 101). To renew the ancient alliance
between the Shadow and Shelob’s children, he brings
with him five great red gems, cut and fashioned of old by
Celebrimbor of Hollin. Three are consumed by the three
Children of Shelob; they quarrel over the other two. The
Ringwraith convinces Tyulqin the Weaver to aid him in
attacking the Woodmen.

At long last, Sauron unveils his presence in Mordor, and
commands his servants to gather in the Black Land.
Characters with at least a permanent Shadow point or a
Shadow rating of 3 or more may experience nightmares;
mostly visions of the Black Land, the raising of the Dark
Tower or the Flaming Eye.

At some time, Gollum finally leaves Mirkwood. He soon
turns in the direction of Mordor, as if heeding a call.

In the dead of winter, three shades enter Dol Guldur - the
Ringwraiths have returned in Southern Mirkwood, and
soon busy themselves with the errands their dark master

Things are stirring in the dark places of the woods. The
name of Sauron is not yet spoken aloud in the North,
as most recognise it only as a shadow on the borders of

24

Adventuring Phase:
The Helm of Peace

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

old stories. Still, the Enemy’s power grows, and in the
lengthening Shadow old horrors awaken.

their branches twining overhead in an arch over the
brow of the wearer. Mounted directly above the brow is
a glittering green gem, and its crest is made of fine horsehair. The helm is worth eight points of Treasure.

In the winter of 2951 the folk of the East Bight start
to whisper of glowing lights that dance amid the long
barrows where their ancestors lie, and of groaning voices
that echo from the deepest tombs. The Hall of Ghosts
(Heart of the Wild, page 104) is seen twice by hunters,
and the discovery of four dead men – killed, seemingly, by
fright – convinces Ceawin that something must be done.

The easiest route to the East Bight from the North is the
one currently used by merchants travelling south. Ten
years after the death of Smaug the traffic has intensified,
and it is not so difficult now to find a boat that navigates
the Running River, to then take the paths that follow the
eaves of Mirkwood to the south. The journey covers more
than 250 miles and takes about two weeks in total (and
four Fatigue tests).

Following the advice of seers, the chieftain of the East Bight
decides that the dead must be honoured with a gift, and
hires a Dwarf smith to forge a helm that commemorates
the deeds of the Northmen of old.

En route, the company may encounter the few folk who
dwell in the sullen valleys along the eastern edge of
Mirkwood, like Gwina, a wandering merchant from
Dorwinion (Heart of the Wild, page 100).

If the companions are in the East Bight or are allies of
Ceawin (perhaps they voted in his favour at the folk-moot
of 2948) then he may ask them to travel to Lake-town to
collect the helm. Alternatively, if they are in Erebor, Dale
or Lake-town, they may meet Ceawin’s representative and
be hired to deliver the helm to the East Bight.

The Outlaws
The helm’s journey south is watched by unfriendly eyes.
A band of outlaws intends to ambush the company. These
outlaws are led by a warrior named Beldir and his lover
Valdis (Heart of the Wild, page 100). The outlaws use
Valdis’ raven Eágbitar (‘Eyebiter’) as a spy and scout. If
the bird finds them suitable victims, then they mount an
ambush. Valdis heard tell of the helm of the dead, and
intends to steal it.

A Gift for the Dead
The gift for the dead is ready by the very end of summer. It
is a magnificent steel helmet inlaid with gold, made after
the fashion of the Northmen. It is carved with images of
heroes, and two golden trees grow on the cheek-guards,

25

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The company may spot the strange behaviour of the bird
Eágbitar with a successful Hunting test. Otherwise, they
have a chance to spot the ambush with an Awareness test
(TN 16) before the enemy strikes. Beldir’s force consists
of three outlaws for every two companions, plus himself
and Valdis. She stays at the rear of the battle, using a bow
and spitting curses at the company, while Beldir wades in
swinging his sword. Beldir spares the companions if they
hand over the helm.
If the companions slay Beldir, Valdis escapes into the
woods. Valdis is featured again in the tale of years in the
entry for 2962; if Valdis is slain, her role in the campaign
can be taken by her vengeful younger sister Valya.

Ghosts of the East Bight
The helm arrives at its destination when it is already
autumn. An unseasonably cold wind out of the North
has been blowing for weeks, and the land sleeps under a
shroud of snow. Many villagers believes the sudden cold
is a curse from the barrows, and that the gift of the helm
is an even more urgent errand.
Ceawin asks the company to accompany him into the
wood; few of his other warriors are brave to enter the
shadow of the trees these days. The journey into the forest
is a short one. Snow tumbles from laden branches, and
the bare trees resemble leering skeletons or clutching

26

fingers. Patches of ice seem placed with deliberate malice.
After half an hour’s walk, the companions find one of the
barrows of old. Ceawin sweeps away some snow to reveal
that the mound is covered in Evermind flowers, which
were traditionally planted on the graves of the kings of
old. The entrance to the tomb is a small gap between the
roots of an oak tree. Ceawin lights a torch, takes the helm
and climbs down alone.
The companions hear his voice, but it is very distant as
though he were many miles under the earth. He asks for
the honoured dead of the North to bless his people, and
thanks them for the fertile land they carved from the
forest. He offers them this helm as a gift. Suddenly, the
air grows intensely cold, and a sepulchral voice speaks
in answer.

Cold be hand and heart and bone
And cold be sleep under stone:
Never more to wake on stony bed,
Never, ’til the Sun fails and the Moon is dead.
Terror strikes the company. Each of them must make a Fear
test immediately (TN 16). Companions who fail their Valour
roll are daunted and thus cannot spend Hope as long as
they are in the barrow (all of Ceawin’s guards turn round
and flee). Characters who are willing can enter the barrow,
but only one character at a time can wriggle through the

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

narrow entrance (and it is even narrower now, as if the treeroots have clenched together to bar the way)

the upper hand and several Beornings are slain or taken
prisoner, but then they glimpse a bear moving through the
woods and flee, fearing the wrath of Beorn.

If a character enters the dark barrow, lit only by Ceawin’s
guttering, dropped torch, he dimly makes out a figure
lying on a stone bier, and looming over the bier is a bony
shadow – a Wood-wight (see page 137). The Wight has the
helm of the dead clutched in its cold fingers, and is about
to place it on Ceawin’s head.

A trade fair is held in Woodmen-town. Any hero owning a
holding in or near Woodmen-town sees its rating reduced
temporarily by 2 points (the reduction applies for one
year).
If Ceawin of the East Bight is under the thrall of the
Wood-wights (see The Helm of Peace, page 27), then his
behaviour becomes more erratic over the coming years.
Sometimes, he slips into black rages; at other times, he
speaks as though he is one of the Northmen who died in
the Bight a thousand years ago. He grows increasingly
mistrustful of the Woodmen of the Western Eaves.

If the companions fail to defeat the Wood-wight (or give
it the opportunity to place the helm on Ceawin’s head),
then the undead horror vanishes a moment later. Ceawin
recovers and emerges from the tomb, still wearing the
helm. He claims that the ’kings of old’ crowned him, and
that the Wights will not trouble the East Bight again. In
truth, the Wood-wight has cursed him, and Ceawin is now
in the thrall of the dead.

Adventuring Phase:
the Staff of the Roadwarden

If the companions rescue Ceawin from the Wood-wight,
then the barrow collapses on top of them. Each character
rolls the Feat die and loses that much Endurance, suffering
a Wound on a C result. Some of the characters feel cold
dead hands clutching at them, trying to drag them down
into the grave. The helm is lost forever.

If the companions are in any of the Woodmen settlements
of Mirkwood, Bofri, son of Bofur (Heart of the Wild, page
130) seeks them out. He has heard of their courage and
skill, and asks for their help.
Since arriving in Mirkwood four years earlier, Bofri has
surveyed both ends of the Old Forest Road outside the
forest. He believes that his ancestors wound the road with
potent spells to preserve it, and that it is still mostly intact.
Bofri intends to travel to the Millfort, one of the three
larger keeps the Dwarves built to protect the road, and
ascertain how intact it is. The Millfort was built roughly
two-fifths of the way along the road.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
If the companions successfully delivered the helm of
peace, then Ceawin offers land to any character without
a holding and gives him permission to build a farm there.

Year 2952

According to Dwarven records, the Staff of the Roadwarden,
the traditional symbol of office for the master of the road,
lies in the Millfort. Bofri wants to reclaim it, and needs
brave companions to succeed.

Events
Duskwater, the eldest of the three River-maidens, falls
into a trap set by the Messenger of Mordor and the Spider
Tyulqin. The maiden is wrapped in a web that poisons her
mind, turning her against the Woodmen. Fishing in the
Black Tarn is especially poor this year.

To the Millfort
The company will most likely start the journey somewhere
in the land of the Woodmen. If they are in Woodland Hall,
Bofri leads them north-east for some sixty miles through
Western Mirkwood and the edge of the Heart. It takes them
nine days (and two Fatigue tests) to reach their destination
(see The Old Road below).

Viglund the Cruel (Heart of the Wild, page 29) tries to seize
the Forest Gate. The Beornings object, and the two sides
clash under the forest eaves. Initially, Viglund’s men have
27

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

If the companions follow the Dusky River, or paddle along
it, they encounter the River-maiden named Sunshadow,
who flirts with one of the more attractive male heroes.
Later along the journey, if the companions encounter a
Hazard, then Sunshadow’s sister Silverbell may appear to
aid them.
If the companions take an overland route, then they
may encounter Geirbald Kinslayer and his brotherhood
of outlaws (see The Appendix page 130). Approaching
them in a friendly fashion with a successful Courtesy
roll produces a useful titbit of information – a week ago,
Geirbald and his men ambushed a band of Orcs that were
fleeing west. Normally when threatened, the Goblins of
the forest head in the opposite direction, towards the
Mountains. They must have run into something so
scary that they decided to risk the Mannish lands of
the west.

once stood! This way!” He hurries off down the overgrown
road to the east… and then stops dead. “What’s that?” he
exclaims, and points to the top of a nearby tree.
The characters see a web-wrapped bundle stuck to the
upper branches. It looks like a victim of a Spider, but it’s
much too big to be a person. If someone climbs up and
cuts the webbing open, a gory mess tumbles down and
splatters on the ground below. It is, if they hold their noses
and examine it closely, the remains of two large boars.

A Spider

The Old Road

The Millfort was once a Dwarven way station, a fortified
coaching inn where travellers could rest in safety and
recover before continuing. A forest stream flows past the
back of the fortress, and a small mill wheel once turned
there. Today, the mill wheel is long gone and the fort is
entirely overgrown. The outer walls are still mostly intact,
and the squat drum-shaped tower in the middle… has an
absolutely gigantic Spider sleeping on it.

At the end of their journey through thick woods, the
companions suddenly emerge into a leafy tunnel. “We’ve
found it!” exclaims Bofri, and he eagerly scrabbles at the
ground with a shovel until he uncovers cut stone. His
fingers trace the dirt-filled runes engraved on the slab.
“Five miles east to the Millfort from this spot. Forty-five to
the Beacon tower, and sixty-five west to where the Westfort

The biggest Spider any of the companions have ever seen
is sprawled across the top of the tower. The monster is at
least fifteen feet across, with its huge hairy legs dangling
over the edge. A companion possessing Mirkwood-lore or
Enemy-lore (Spiders) may invoke the Trait to be allowed a
Lore roll: a successful roll identifies the creature as Tauler

28

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

the Hunter (see The Appendix, page 135). The monstrous
Spider clearly feasted on the boars and is now sleeping off
a heavy meal, or else it is very much awake and watching
the companions. It’s hard to tell with the glassy-eyes of
Spiders…

Getting Past Tauler
The Staff of the Roadwarden is somewhere inside the
tower. All the company needs to do is get past the giant
Spider…
•

•

•

Attacking Tauler: Good luck! Tauler’s statistics are
found on page 135 of The Appendix. On the offchance that the companions manage to wound Tauler
or reduce him to zero Endurance, Tauler makes a
great leap into the trees and vanishes, chittering in
pain. Plans that involve poisoning the beast, luring
it into a trap, setting it on fire or some other trickery
might work, but won’t easily kill Tauler. The best the
companions can hope to do is drive him away.
Sneaking Past: Creeping past the slumbering Tauler
requires a Stealth test at TN 16 to get in, and another
one to move around inside and a third to get out of the
Millfort. Failing a test awakens the Spider.
Begging the Spider’s Pardon: Tauler understands
the Common Speech, and can even speak a few
words of it. Should a companion obtain a great or

extraordinary success on a roll of Courtesy, the
Spider will let them pass; companions with one or
more points of Shadow need only a normal success,
as they discover they understand better what the
creature says. A gift of gemstones would result in an
automatic success - Tauler loves to consume their
light to see their beauty wither. Do the companions
have any precious stones?
If the companions try to get past Tauler and fail, then there
might still be hope – they can try fleeing or else surrender
(in which case, they can try Courtesy again). If they sneak
past, but wake the Spider up while they are inside, then
they must somehow escape the tower with the monster
crawling around the outside of the building!
While inside the Millfort, a successful Search roll uncovers
a cunningly hidden chest in the topmost room of the tower;
inside lies the Roadwarden’s Staff – which Bofri is eager to
claim – alongside several crumbling leather-bound ledgers,
and a smaller casket of gold and gems worth 20 points of
Treasure (ten in gems, ten in gold and silver).

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
This winter is very hard; all holdings see their rating
increased by 1 (or by 3 if near the Black Tarn), and heroes
cannot choose the Heal Corruption undertaking.

The Roadwarden’s Staff
The magnificent staff of the Roadwarden is a walking stick of Dwarf-make, with a shaft of polished wood topped

with a pearl as great as a small dove’s egg. Its maker engraved runes of power and protection on the wooden shaft.
A hidden compartment inside the staff once contained maps of the Old Forest Road, but Bofri does not know if they
are still intact.

The staff might be worth up to 20 points of Treasure, maybe more if sold to Dwarves. It also has three special
benefits:
•

The bearer of the staff gains a +1 bonus to all Travel rolls (+2 on a Dwarf-made road)

•

A Dwarf who bears the staff and is acknowledged as Warden of the Road sees his Standing raised by one level.

•

Certain doors, supply caches and vaults associated with the Old Dwarf Road only open for the bearer of the staff

29

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Restoring the Old Forest Road
Bofri’s ultimate goal is to open the road to traffic once

endeavour that will take many years to complete. The

between west and east, and perhaps attract traffic even

Fellowship phase for each of the following undertakings:

more, and charge a toll. Doing so would open trade
from the lands of the South: the overland route between

deed requires the companions to dedicate at least one

Dorwinion and Gondor runs too close to the gates of

• The clearing of the forest.

opening the road would let the merchants of Dale go

• The restoration of the road itself.

Mordor, especially now that Sauron has returned -

south on the Running River, then load their cargo onto

carts and cross Mirkwood via the road (the Elf-path
is no good for such trade, as it twists and winds and

• The recovery of the forts.
• Patrolling the woods.

• Sending messengers to attract trade.

vanishes amid the trees).

Should the company accomplish this great deed, they

If the companions are interested, they might join Bofri

a valuable holding (rating 8 initially, dropping by 1

in his ambitious undertaking. Clearing the Old Forest
Road and rebuilding the damaged sections is a great

Year 2953

will share in the tolls collected by Bofri, giving them
in each year as the traffic along the Old Forest Road
intensifies, to a minimum rating of 5: thriving).

way to Imladris, Thranduil pretends he is going West, to
the Grey Havens. On his way home, the Elvenking barely
stops along the journey, as he and his retinue of knights
ride day and night until they reach the Forest Gate.

Events
The treachery of the River-maiden begins. The Black Tarn
darkens and becomes choked with weeds. Woodmen begin
to disappear and boats vanish as the corrupted Rivermaiden attacks those who stray too close to the water’s edge.
The Werewolf of Mirkwood appears in the Bower and
attacks the Elves as they make merry. If any of the
companions spent the last Fellowship phase in the
Woodland Realm, or have kin or holdings there, then they
may too be victims of the Werewolf’s rampage.
The Messenger of Mordor contacts the men of the Tyrant’s
Hill. If Mogdred was welcomed into the Woodmen during
the folk-moot at Rhosgobel, he refuses to listen and closes
his doors on the black rider. However, if Mogdred was
rejected by the Woodmen, then he listens to the wraith’s
message, and the strength of the Tyrant’s Hill is once again
added to that of Dol Guldur.
In October, the Elvenking travels secretly to Rivendell,
summoned by the White Council. If encountered on his
30

Squabbles and skirmishes continue
Beornings and the folk of Viglund.

between

the

Saruman withdraws in Isengard in late October, after
the meeting of the White Council that will prove to be the
last. He has persuaded the Wise that the One Ring is lost
forever, and now intends to bring his study of the Rings of
Power to a more practical level…
Fengel, King of Rohan, dies after a long but unpopular
rule. He was deemed a greedy and unwise king. His only
son, Thengel, left him to serve Gondor. Before Thengel
returns from his self-imposed exile, Fengel’s cupbearer
Lamas steals a chest of gold and other treasures from
Edoras and escapes on the king’s favourite horse. Lamas
rides north into Wilderland. He intends to spend his illgotten loot in Lake-town.
Turgon, the twenty-fourth Ruling Steward, dies in Gondor. False
rumours claim that he took to his bed after Sauron declared,
and never rose again. He is succeeded by his son Echtelion II.

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

table. It crashes into Orophal, sinks its teeth into his
sword-arm, then flings him far across the clearing to
smash into the bole of a beech tree.

Adventuring Phase:
The Beast of the Forest

The Werewolf has returned. For an instant, as the beast
stands beneath the skin hanging from the tree overhead,
the companions clearly see that both creatures are
identical. Orophal did kill the Werewolf, but somehow it
didn’t stay dead.

Angered by the Werewolf’s attack on the Bower, King
Thranduil dispatches his hunters. One of them, a brave
knight named Orophal, tracks the Werewolf to its lair in
the Mountains of Mirkwood. He is wounded in the fight,
but slays the beast and then starts his journey home. On
the way, he attracts an entourage of younger Elves, many
of whom are Wayward Elves.

Few of the Elves at the feast are especially talented fighters,
so it is up to the companions to face the Werewolf.
Fortunately, the beast furiously turns to smash the lamps
hanging from the trees, giving the characters two options:
do they move in to a better position (they may roll for
Combat Advantages) OR attack the Werewolf before he
destroys all the lamps and plunges the clearing into pitch
darkness (giving the Werewolf the benefit of its Denizen of
the Dark ability)?

The companions hear tales of the triumphant return of
the hero as they travel in the Woodland Realm. One night,
they see campfires and lamps in the distance through the
trees. As they investigate, they find a band of Elves feasting
and celebrating beneath the stars. Gleaming lamps hang
from trees, and a long white cloth laden with delicious
food is laid over trestle tables. The horrible hame of the
Werewolf hangs from a branch over the feast, and brave
Orophal sits at a place of honour at the head of the table.
Assuming the companions approach in an appropriate
way and are not enemies of the Elves, they are invited to
join the feast. An inebriated Orophal greets them, then
returns to retelling the tale of his battle with the Werewolf.
The fight left him wounded and exhausted, but now it
is time to revel in the victory: he wields a chicken leg as
a sword, with the remainder of the chicken standing in
for either the Mountains of Mirkwood or the Werewolf,
depending on which stage of the story he is currently
drunkenly recounting.
At the feast, the companions may hear more tales of the
Wayward Elves, the troubles with the Barding foresters
and gossip from Thranduil’s court.

The Coming of the Beast
Suddenly, Orophal points into the darkness beyond
the edge of the clearing in horror. “Those eyes!” The
companions see a pair of huge glowing-red eyes. Beneath
them, the firelight glints off a row of wickedly sharp teeth.
“It cannot be!” says Orophal. “I killed you already”. He
fumbles for his sword, but he is too slow – a huge shape
leaps out of the darkness and bounds across the feasting

The statistics for the Werewolf of Mirkwood are found on
page 83 of the Loremaster’s Guide. The Werewolf flees if
wounded or reduced to 0 Endurance. If killed, it abandons
its current wolf-body to possess another.
31

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

After the Battle
Orophal is grievously injured. A successful Healing test
treats his wound and ensures that his spirit does not slip
away to the Halls of Mandos. The Werewolf (assuming it is
still alive) continues to stalk the companions as they make
their way to the palace of Thranduil.
At the Halls, the companions find safety behind their
magic doors. Outside, they hear the beast howling
and clawing at the gates of the Elvenking’s palace, but

Dwarf-wrought stone wound round with Elven spells can
withstand the fell strength of the Werewolf of Mirkwood.
After several hours, the beast departs. Thranduil’s scouts
follow it through the forest, and discover that it slips away
to the south-west across the Elf-path.
The Elves are confused – some wonder if Orophal lied or
was mistaken when he spoke of slaying the Werewolf,
others wonder if the beast has somehow spawned more
of its kind. Others fear that Sauron, secure in his place of

Secrets of the Lamp
The making of the shining crystals at the heart of the
two Lamps of Amon Lanc is lost to history. Perhaps
Fëanor made them in the depths of time, or some student
of his created them in homage to his master’s work. The
crystals were a tribute to the light of the Two Trees of
Valinor as they shone in the first days of the world,
bright and hopeful and unmarred.
Many long centuries later, Celebrimbor of Hollin
wrought the crystals into two lamps, with the help
of Ormal the Lampmaker. After the destruction of
Eregion by the armies of Sauron, Ormal carried the two
lamps out of the ruin. He brought them over the Misty
Mountains to Amon Lanc, where King Oropher hung
them in a place of honour above his gates. There the
lamps hung for more than three thousand years, until
the Shadow first descended on the forest.
When Thranduil decided to abandon the naked hill to
move his capital north, the lamps were escorted by a
company of picked Elven warriors as one of the treasures
of the Realm. On the way, they were ambushed by
countless Spiders, and all were slain. The lamps were
lost. Thranduil assumed that both were destroyed by the
great Spiders, for it is said that the unhappy children of
Ungoliant consume gems and jewels as a lesser Spider
sucks the juices from its prey. In truth, none of the
Spiders could endure the light of the lamps, even though
they hungered for the beauty and power within.
In the end, the Spiders gave the lamps to the Necromancer,
who locked them away. Sauron intended to corrupt the

32

lamps, or at least to hide them away forever from the
Elves.
When Gandalf entered Dol Guldur in the year 2063, he
found one of the lamps, intact. He recognised its power,
and carried it out of the dungeon with him. This lamp
he entrusted to the young Woodman Balthi, who had
guided him through the forest.
Now, it is a curious thing that Gandalf never told the
Elves of his discovery. He told the Woodmen to place the
lamp inside a glass case, hiding its shape but letting its
radiance burn forth. For fifty generations, the lamp has
hung from the rafters in the Great House of Woodmentown, and only the Wizards and a few descendants of
Balthi know about its true origins.

The Werewolf

In 2460, Sauron returned to Dol Guldur and sought ways
to increase his power. His servants found a slumbering
spirit from the Elder Days. Long ago, the Elves blasted
the spirit with beams of light, wounding it and causing
it to flee to the dark caverns under Mirkwood to nurse
its wounds. Sauron convinced the spirit to serve him,
first by threatening it with the light of the remaining
lamp, and then by giving the spirit the lamp to destroy.
The Werewolf was braver than the Spiders – it endured
the agony of the light because its hatred was stronger.
The other lamp remains hidden in plain sight in
Woodmen-town, and the glimmer of its light continues
to torment the Werewolf…

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

power, has created some new race of monsters to harass
the Free Peoples.
Thranduil decides that more information is needed
about the beast. Orophal found the beast’s lair – perhaps
there are clues hidden there about the nature of the
Werewolf. Orophal is too wounded to travel, but can tell
the companions exactly where he found the beast’s lair.
Otherwise, the characters must find it using Explore (and
failed rolls draw the attention of Orcs, Spiders, Vampires
or Wargs…).

The Lair of the Beast
Eventually, the companions come to the network of bonestrewn caves where the Werewolf makes its lair. A cruel
Loremaster may add Orc sentries, lesser Hounds of
Mordor or Wargs to the vicinity of the lair. Entering the dark
tunnels, it seems that the Werewolf is not at home – the
foul smell of rotting flesh and animal musk is strong, but
not overpowering. If they dare descend into the deepest
caverns, the companions find something strange. Lying in
one corner is the shattered remains of an ancient Elven
lamp. The lamp was clearly of astounding craftsmanship,

and was wrought of the finest materials. A companion
with Elven-lore may make a Lore roll: a success evokes the
days of Amon Lanc and the brightness of the two glorious
lamps – one gold, and one silver – that once hung outside
the doors of the fortress. They were made by Celebrimbor
and the Wood-elf Ormal (Heart of the Wild, page 79) in
the depths of time.
The lamp was clearly the focus of the Werewolf’s frenzied
hate over many centuries. It has gnawed on the lamp, and
hurled it against the walls, clawed at it, dropped it from
a height, ripped it to pieces and shattered the enchanted
glass that once fuelled its light. Looking at the ruined
lamp, the company can sense that this artefact was hated
by the beast as much as anything has ever been hated in
all of Middle-earth.

Return to the Halls
If they leave the lair of the Werewolf alive, the companions
can return to the Halls of the Elvenking. On their journey
home, they hear the distant roaring of the Werewolf of
Mirkwood, and may even glimpse the monster if they are
unlucky.

New Fellowship Phase Undertaking: Search for Answers
4-5. Useful information : The Loremaster must
provide one useful element of information about your
researched subject.
6-7. Precious information : The Loremaster must
provide two useful elements of information about the
researched subject.
8-9. A Mystery Revealed : You have uncovered
something substantial - the Loremaster must provide
two useful elements of information and you gain 1
Experience point.
10. Great Secrets : You have discovered everything
that was possible to discover about the subject in the
place you have been making your research, and you also
recover 1 point of Hope and gain 1 Experience point.

New Fellowship Phase Undertaking: Search for Answers
If the companions are spending a Fellowship phase at a
location with an appropriate source of learning, be it a
collection of scrolls of lore and song, a treasury of books
and tablets, or a wise man or council of elders, they may
choose this undertaking and research an obscure topic.
When a companion chooses this undertaking, he first
specifies the subject he is researching; then, he makes
a Lore test, followed by a roll on the table below. This
second roll is modified by +1 if the hero possesses an
applicable Lore Speciality, +2 if the Lore roll was a
great success, +4 if the Lore roll was an extraordinary
success.

A. Treat this as 8-9, A Mystery Revealed, or roll
again.
1-3 Nothing Useful! :You have spent days and nights
pouring over dusty books and crumbling parchments.

C. Forbidden Knowledge : Your curiosity has had

the best of you, and pushed you to crave for secrets that
were best left uncovered - gain 1 Shadow point.

33

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Thranduil recognises their description of the lamp. It must
surely be one of the two that once hung from the doors
of Amon Lanc, but were lost long ago. He suggests the
company consult with Ormal the Lampmaker (Heart of
the Wild, page 79) to learn more. If the companions do so,
they might learn the history of the lamp (see also the next
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End entry).

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Elven companions who have met Ormal may study with
him, either choosing the Study with the Lampmaker
undertaking (Heart of the Wild, page 79) or by choosing
the new undertaking Search for Answers (see the box on
the previous page).

Year 2954

Two young hunters from Black Tarn Hall return from a
frog-hunting expedition along the lake’s perilous northeastern shore, carrying with them four handfuls of gold.
They entered an ancient cairn in the forest and found
there some forgotten gold. They dared only take a double
handful apiece, lest they anger the ghosts that they fear
live there. Despite their best efforts, the two hunters are
unable to find the ruin again. Tales of gold in the wood
draw some of the greedier Woodmen to explore the
dangerous area on the edge of the Heart of Mirkwood.
One such Woodman, a famed bowman named Hunald,
disappears in the forest. No sign of him is found, and it is
assumed that he has perished.
A shaft in the tin mine at Mountain Hall collapses, burying
several miners. The mountain-folk blame meddling
Goblins.
In Mordor, Mount Doom erupts. The earthquake is felt as
far north as Rhosgobel, although there it is felt only as a
slight shaking.

Events
Maghaz the Orc-captain obeys the commands of the
Messenger of Mordor, and sends Orcs to reoccupy Dol
Guldur, previously inhabited only by the Ringwraiths and
the spirits of the dead. Maghaz himself remains at Fenbridge
Castle, preferring to retain some independence instead of
becoming a minion of the Lieutenant of Dol Guldur.
Orcs, Wargs and Vampires are drawn to Dol Guldur
this year. Many leave their lairs in the Mountains of
Mirkwood and travel south. They skirt around the Spiderhaunted lands in the Heart of Mirkwood, and so enter the
Woodmen settlements in the Western Eaves and along the
Dusky River. The River-maidens help the Woodmen where
they can, but their eldest sister intervenes and tells them
to flee and hide rather than stand and fight.
Black rain falls over much of southern Mirkwood, tainted
with soot and ash from Mount Doom. Where it falls, it
stains the leaves black. The shadow in the south deepens.
Most of the locations in Southern Mirkwood are now
considered to be blighted places. The foul rain hastens the
corruption of the Black Tarn. Over the year, the eastern
portion of the lake is choked with strangling weeds and
slime.
34

Adventuring Phase:
The Lost Path
Since settlers came to the East Bight, there has been more
traffic through the woods of the Narrows of the Forest.
Travellers take shortcuts across the area instead of making
the long journey around the south end or going north.
While Dol Guldur was empty and silent, the paths were
relatively safe, but now things have changed.
If Mogdred was rejected at the folk-moot at Rhosgobel, then
it is his men who cause most of the trouble. If Mogdred
is allied with the Woodmen, then the larger problem is
caused by Wood-wights instead.
If the companions are allies of the Woodmen of Rhosgobel,
or are known to Ceawin the Generous, then they may be
asked to help find a new route across the Narrows of the
Forest. If they are friends of the Woodland Realm, then
King Thranduil may send them south to explore the area
and determine the nature of the growing Shadow in Dol
Guldur.

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

She introduces herself as Duskwater (any Woodman, or
a character who possesses the Trait Mirkwood-lore or
makes a Lore roll, recognises this as the name of the eldest
River-maiden). Duskwater offers to guide the company
through the swamps, either to Black Tarn Hall or across
the swamps into the Narrows.

The company’s task is to find a path that runs from Black
Tarn Hall to the East Bight. They may begin their mission
at either side of the Narrows of the Forest; the encounters
below assume they start at Black Tarn Hall, guests of
Amaleoda the shieldmaiden; her village is located on the
north-western shore of the lake, where the Dusky River
enters the Black Tarn.

Duskwater is under the spell of Tyulqin the Weaver (see
page 136), but her offer is an honest one – she is curious,
and helps the company in order to allay suspicion.

Crossing the Swamps
The lands around the Black Tarn have grown treacherous.
The companions face a perilous march through the fens,
where the soggy, muddy ground conceals hidden treeroots and many serpents. Thick greenish fogs wrap around
the trees. To find a safe path, the companions must pass
at least one successful Explore test (TN 18). A failure
indicates that the companions wander in the marshes for
another day. Failing with an C means the companions
are lost.

If the company meet her, a keen-eyed hero (or an
Awareness test with TN 18) notices that what appeared to
be fish-scales on her corslet of armour is actually a lattice
of thousands of fine threads, rippling like gossamer.

Exploring the Woods
The companions need to find a safe path through the forest,
one that can be followed not only by other adventurers
and travel-hardened Woodmen, but also by merchants
leading baggage ponies or fat traders from Dale.

While wandering in the swamps, one member of the
company sees a beautiful dark-haired woman slipping
through the trees, clad in a grey corslet of armour that
glitters like fish-scales. If the companions are not lost,
then she simply seems to be watching them as they
travel through her realm. However, if the companions
are wandering aimlessly, then the woman approaches
them.

To this end, Scouts must succeed in at least one Explore test
(TN 16) each day. If all tests fail, the companions haven’t
found a suitable route yet. On a success, they find a barely
adequate path, not enough for their needs; on a great or
extraordinary success they find an unusually easy route.

35

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Valley of Illusion
When the companions have travelled for some thirty miles
through severe (TN 18) terrain, they come upon what must
be an old Elf-road running through the wood. Following it,
they are led into a silent, high-sided valley. The forests on
either side are thick with dark firs, but the valley floor is
remarkably clear and smooth. This path is an ideal road
through the wood. In a few places, the companions see
signs of Spider-webs, but there are no monsters.
After a few minutes’ walk, the companions come to a
spot where the valley branches in two. One spur goes off
north, towards the Mountains of Mirkwood, where they
can hear a familiar voice shouting for help. A huge Spiderweb stretches across the mouth of the valley, and caught
like a fly in the web is… well, the companions see whoever
they are most likely to try to save. They might see an
important patron, like Radagast or Thranduil. They might
see a trusted friend, a loved one, or even a family member
caught in the web. This is an illusion woven by the great
Spider Tyulqin, whose evil magic has caught the company.
She is a clever huntress – whatever illusion she creates is a
plausible one. She will choose a victim who could end up
in a web in Mirkwood, so the companions are not going to
come across the Steward of Gondor or Lobelia SackvilleBaggins trussed up in a web (howsoever much she might
deserve it).

Freeing the Prisoner
The prisoner is tightly wrapped in webs. To free the
prisoner, the companions have to climb up onto the
web and cut the sticky strands. At least, that’s what they
think they are doing – in reality, they are walking up to a
thick black web and wrapping themselves in its grasping
strands.
A character caught in the black web can free himself with
three successful Athletics test. A great success counts as
two successful tests, an extraordinary success as three.
Someone outside the web can use an edged weapon skill
like Dagger or Sword instead of Athletics to help cut a
victim free, or just pull with Athletics.

Breaking the Spell
If a player smells a rat, he might propose a roll of Insight.
Should it succeed, the companion perceives that something
36

is wrong about the situation, and eventually snaps out of
the enchantment. Otherwise, a companion attempting
any action and succeeding with a A may be allowed to
make a Wisdom test to see through the Spider’s Dreadful
Spells.
Once a character sees through the illusion, he finds that
he is covered in an exceedingly fine black Spider-web,
so fragile and faint that he brushed through it without
noticing. Further, the other members of the companions
are similarly covered. Breaking this delicate web dispels
the illusion.

Shadow of the Spider
Once three or all victims are trapped, or once the
companions discover the illusion, then Tyulqin reveals
herself. She lets the illusion melt away, and the characters
see a huge many-eyed Spider sitting at the top of the ravine
far overhead. She begins to crawl slowly down the wall.
Droplets of venom drool from her fangs and hiss upon the
ground.
Killing Tyulqin is virtually impossible – like her sibling,
she flees if wounded or reduced to zero Endurance. She
recently ate, so she is slow and sleepy. It takes her six
rounds to lazily crawl down the wall, though she will
hasten if the companions try shooting her with arrows.
She may also choose to throw a web of illusion over an
archer.
Once the companions are free of the illusion, they discover
that the smooth, safe Elf-road was actually a tangled trap,
and that they are not where they thought they are. They
are now lost in the forest, and must find their way back
with a successful Travel test (TN 16). Failure means they
are lost in the woods for another day, stalked by dread
Tyulqin.

The Far End of the Forest
Once the companions leave the Spider’s realm, they
find themselves in a wilderness of thorns and fir trees.
The companions progress through another thirty miles
of severe (TN 18) terrain. Once they cut their way free
of the tangle of the trees, they arrive in a region of the
forest where the trunks are more widely spaced. They have
reached the fringes of the East Bight, a land that was once

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

10, Injury 22. Any damage (or Wound!) is very real. The
TN of the blow depends on whether the companion tries
to oppose it and parry or not:

cleared by the axes of the Northmen. The trees have since
reclaimed the territory, but are not as closely packed as
they once were. Soon, they begin to spot rubble and fallen
stones amid the tree-roots. There was a town here, once,
long ago. The air is foul-smelling and foetid, and manylegged things scuttle over the broken white stones.

•

As the companions pass through the area, they come
upon one building that is entirely intact. It is a longhouse
of wood and stone, seemingly unmarked by the passage
of time. The doors are closed, but do not appear to be
locked. A successful Lore roll counsels caution, and
recalls tales of the Hall of Ghosts (Heart of the Wild, page
104). The door of the hall is marked with runes used by
the Woodmen and their Beorning kin, and read ’O CHILD
OF OAK, STAND YET AGAINST THE STORM’.

If the companion actively tries to dodge, the TN for the
blow is equal to 10 plus the Parry stat of the target.
Otherwise, the difficulty to hit is only TN 10.

The ghost’s reward is a clear vision of a lonely oak tree
in the East Bight. Buried amid the roots of that tree is
an ancient chest, containing gold and precious stones
worth 50 Treasure and an iron crown, once worn by the
Chieftain of the Northmen of Rhovanion.

Foes Near At Hand
Another challenge awaits on the edge of the forest.
Someone lies in ambush: the nature of the ambushers
depends on the current circumstances in Mirkwood.

The Silent Hall
If a character opens the door of the longhouse and steps
through, he is trapped. The door shuts tight behind him,
and no force can pry it open again. Inside, the hall is
empty and dark, but the companion immediately sees a
huge bearded axe-head whistling towards him!

•

If the companions failed to protect Ceawin from the Woodwight in The Helm of Peace (page 24), then the character
who entered the Hall of Ghosts catches a glimpse of the
chieftain of the East Bight wielding the axe, wearing the
jewelled helm made by the Dwarves: the spirit haunting
him goes abroad at night, wearing the lord’s face (this
vision in the Hall of Ghosts may encourage the company
to seek a cure for Ceawin). If the company successfully
protected Ceawin, then the attacker in the Hall of Ghosts
is an esteemed ancestor of the Woodmen, stirred by
Ceawin’s gift.

If Mogdred is an enemy of the Woodmen, then the
attackers are warriors bearing the symbol of Amon
Bauglir, the Tyrant’s Hill. One of the brigand women
pretends to be an injured and lost traveller, and when
the companions move to help her, the other brigands
ambush them.

Otherwise, the attackers are a band of Orcs from Fenbridge
Castle, led by a Hill-Troll Chief (Loremaster’s Guide, page
80). The Orcs are under orders to attack anyone passing
through the Narrows of the Forest. The ambush begins
with the Hill-Troll toppling a tree on top of the company.

After the Journey
If the companions successfully find a safe path through
the Narrows, then either Ceawin or Amaleoda rewards
them with 3 points of Treasure apiece.

The ghost in the hall seeks to test the courage of the
companion – if the trapped hero does not attempt to
dodge the blow, but tries to stop the attack by addressing
the spirit or otherwise accepts the threat of a wound, then
the ghost will reward him. If the character flinches or tries
to dodge, the ghost’s intent is murderous.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
The following winter is the worst in living memory. The
rating for all holdings is raised by 2, and many old and
sick perish in the biting cold.

The axe blow lands on the companion as if it was inflicted
by someone with a favoured Axe skill of 5, a Body of 6 and
using a weapon with the following stats: Damage 7, Edge
37

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The River Bore

Year 2955

The characters are travelling on the dark waters of
the Dusky River on a little boat, in company of some
Woodmen. They are going south, in the direction of the
Black Tarn. The stream is fast-flowing where it is not
choked with black weeds, and the sharp-fingered branches
of the trees always seem to hang down just at eye-level,
but the Woodmen know this river well. It is their friend,
their shield against the Spiders, and their road through
the dark woods. One of the Woodmen glimpses a pale
slim form in the waters, and smiles – the River-maidens
are nearby, watching over the boat.

Events
Marsh-dwellers are seen in the Black Tarn along the
eastern shore. The cryptic creatures arrive early in the
spring.
If Ceawin is possessed, then the lord of the East Bight
becomes even stranger. He sends several of his trusted
men into exile for plotting against him. They end up joining
with the outlaws of Geirbald Kinslayer (The Appendix,
page 130).

And then something strikes the boat hard from below.
Cargo jolts free, poles are wrenched from hands, and
everyone falls about in disarray. Suddenly, the river
seems to seize the boat and carry it away downstream.
Faster and faster goes the boat, as if it had grown wings.
The waters whirl and churn – anyone jumping into the
river would surely be swept away and likely perish.

The quarrel between the Beornings and the followers
of Viglund is renewed when some of Viglund’s men
are attacked by an unseen bowman. They blame the
Beornings; in truth, the attacker was a mischievous Elf of
the woods.
The bitter winter of the last year struck Dorwinion
especially hard, and many of the vineyards of that land are
blighted. The coming grape harvest will be poor indeed.
Thranduil’s wine merchant Halbrech makes it known that
he seeks to purchase wine from the southlands if none can
be found in the North.

The boat thunders downstream, moving with terrifying
speed. Winds howl so loud that the passengers cannot
speak, while the spray blinds them so that all they can
do is hang on for dear life. Anyone on board must pass
an Athletics tests (TN 16) or lose a Success die worth of
Endurance points; those who fail with an C lose two
Success dice worth of Endurance points.

Adventuring Phase:
Treacherous Waters

Suddenly, the boat plunges into the forest along one of
the many narrow streams that head east into the Heart
of Mirkwood. The boat smashes through branches and
skips over rocks. From the river, the companions hear the
sound of cackling laughter.

Ever since 2952, the River-maiden Duskwater has been in
the thrall of Dol Guldur. Her treachery grows more evident
this year. This adventure takes place either around the
Black Tarn or anywhere along the Dusky River.

Lost in the Sea of Trees
When the boat finally stops its mad journey, the
companions have no idea how far they travelled or exactly
where they are. The boat has smashed its frame against
the stony bottom of a shallow part of the stream, deep into
a tangled part of the forest.

This episode can be run in one of two ways: the
simplest approach is to have the adventure befall to
the company as they travel along the Dusky River on a
boat. Alternatively, companions might be hired to find
a missing boat, or better yet, have someone important
to them (a friend, a kinsman, a lover, a child) be on that
boat when it vanishes.

Only one way seems obvious, to follow the river
downstream, but that is easier said than done – between
marshy ground, the icy-cold water, serpents and leeches,
and the tangle of trees, even following a clear route is hard.
38

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

Also, that river twisted and bucked like a dying snake.
There might be a more direct route back to the Western
Eaves if the companions cut through the forest.
•

Following the river is a journey of some 40 miles,
which is at least five days travel through the densest
part of Mirkwood.

•

The most direct route through the forest is only 20
miles long. However, the company’s Scout must
make a successful Explore roll (TN 18) each day if
the companions are to make any progress in the right
direction. Travel rolls are at TN 18.

•

Successful Hunting rolls are needed to find fish,
roots and edible berries each day. Failing a roll with
an C means that the characters eat something they
should not have touched and gain a Shadow point.

Tracking the Lost Boat
If the companions were not aboard the bewitched boat,
then they must find the lost travellers. This means
following their route up the nameless forest stream,
finding the wreck of the boat, and then discovering that
the lost travellers decided (or were forced by some horror
– the companions find the tracks of some huge beast in
the mud) to cut through the forest. More Hunting rolls
(TN 18) are needed to track the boat crew in the darkness
of Mirkwood.

Hungry Spiders
Being lost and hungry is the least of the dangers of
Mirkwood. The company is in the Heart of Mirkwood, and
it is here that Spiders dwell.
•

If the companions were on the boat, then they are
ambushed by Spiders as they make their way home.
There are two Attercops for every companion, plus at
least two Hunter Spiders and a single Great Spider.
(See The Appendix page 133 for Hunter Spiders, and
the Loremaster’s Guide, pages 76-77 for Attercops and
Great Spiders).

•

If the companions are searching for the missing
travellers, then they find signs that the Spiders caught
them and dragged them away. Searching the woods,
they find the prisoners wrapped up in webs and
hanging from trees. Strangely, the Spiders have not
eaten a single victim.

Other Passengers
A cruel Loremaster may choose to inflict a few other

Woodmen on the company as travelling companions
on the boat.

Baldac: A hardened hunter with little attachment
to his fellow travellers. Baldac advocates leaving the

weaker members of the company behind, so that those
strong enough to survive are not slowed down by them.
Widuric: A middle-aged trader and experienced

boatsman, Widuric is shocked by the strange events

If the companions were able to listen to the Spider’s
chittering language, it is possible that they were able to
grasp some information.

of the day. In all his years, he has never seen anything

like it. Mirkwood is dangerous, yes, but the river –
the river has always been their friend.

A successful roll of Riddle indicates that the Spiders
intended to carry their prisoners off into the Heart of
Mirkwood to feed them to a bigger Spider, the “Mother of
All” (heroes with one or more points of Shadow succeed at
the Riddle roll automatically).

Amaswinta: Young and brash, she dreams of

being an adventurer and a shieldmaiden. She is brave,
but too impulsive and quick to act.

Gudeliva: Very old for one of the folk of the

Wood, Gudeliva has buried a husband, four sons

Anyone with Mirkwood-lore or Enemy-lore (Spiders)
can guess that they mean the fabled horror Sarqin (The
Appendix, page 134).

and six grandchildren. All that remains to her is her

daughter Amaleoda, who is one of the founders of
Black Tarn Hall.

39

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

Sorrow of the Maidens
After rescuing the prisoners, or after having saved
themselves from the Spiders, the companions come to a
marshy area – they will eventually discover they are very
close to the northern shore of the Black Tarn. Here they
spy misshapen creatures sneaking in the shadow of the
willow trees (Marsh-dwellers) but the strange creatures
flee instead of attacking. Then, a slim figure emerges from
the waters and beckon to them. She is clearly one of the
River-maidens, but she is too far away and the mists are
too thick to tell which one she is.

In winter, news of a second Council of the North reaches
the companions. Ambitious heroes may choose to exploit
their renown in their area to drum up some support
themselves, by choosing the new Drumming up Support
undertaking.

The Maiden does not speak to the company, but leads
them through the trees to an eerie, moss-covered cairn.
She points to where a hole opens on the side of the mound
of stones, revealing a hollow chamber. Looking around
with Search finds some golden coins, similar to the ones
found by the young Woodmen hunters near the Black
Tarn in 2954.
Without a word, the Maiden slips into the water and
vanishes, leaving the company to puzzle out the meaning
of her cryptic actions. Is she saying that the River-maidens’
mischief happened because the treasure was stolen? In
truth, this is another cruel trick played by the corrupted
Maiden – she had no particular interest in the treasure,
but wants the Woodmen to turn on each other or blame
themselves for her anger.

40

New Fellowship Phase Undertaking:
Drumming up Support
Companions may return home to call in favours
and meet with influential people, with the goal of

gaining popularity among their neighbours and raise
their Standing rating for a limited time (usually, in
occasion of a specific event).

Buying support like this lets companions raise their
Standing rating at a sixth of the normal Treasure

point cost (see the Adventurer’s Guide, page 173). For

example, a companion could raise his Standing rating

from 3 to 4 at the cost of eight Treasure (instead of 48).
The temporary Standing raise is lost at the end of the
following Year’s End Fellowship phase.

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

The quarrels between the followers of Viglund and the
followers of Beorn grows ever more bitter. Some of the folk
of Woodland Hall march north to aid Beorn’s men in their
skirmishes with the slavers. Beorn himself is unwilling to
go to war, but some of his followers are only too eager to
attack the folk of the Northern Vales.

Year 2956
Events
Messengers arrive from Lake-town, with news of the
second Council of the North that will be held there in late
autumn. Official representatives from all the Free Folk are
expected to attend.

Adventuring Phase:
Murder in Lake-town

The Wizard Radagast spends much of the year wandering
the shores of the Black Tarn. Some say that he takes the
form of a trout, and goes exploring the dark waters. Others
tell of how he is wooing one of the River-maidens.

This adventure takes place outside Mirkwood, in the town
of Esgaroth. The first Council of the North took place in
Dale ten years ago, in 2946. Held on the occasion of the
first Gathering of Five Armies, the great feast celebrating
the victory at the eponymous battle, the meeting saw the
forging of alliances and friendship between the folk of the
North. Now, those bonds are being tested.

King Thranduil declares that he will not personally attend
the Council of the North; other courtiers vie to be named
his ambassador.

King Bard in 2956

is not visiting the nearby realms of Dwarves and Elves.

At the age of 45, Bard is considered a wise ruler, loyal

lands west of the city. He does so in the company of his

When in Dale, he leaves his palace often to hunt in the
closest counsellors, a handful of nobles who once served

to allies and generous to friends. He is very ambitious, as

in his company of archers. This group of advisers keep

he sees the refounding of a wider kingdom of the North

the king informed about all matters, and help him with

as Dale’s manifest destiny. Fifteen years after the death

the courtly activities, often sitting in council in his stead

of Smaug, the king still holds excellent relations with

when matters of lesser importance are at hand. When

the Kingdom under the Mountain, as the economies of

heroes demand an audience with the King, it is most

Erebor and Dale are deeply interconnected - and last but

likely that they will be met by one of his advisors instead.

not least, Bard considers Dáin Ironfoot as a personal

A counsellor might prove more difficult to impress than

friend. There is friendship also between King Bard and

the King himself, as the increasing wealth and power of

King Thranduil, but this sentiment is weakening on

these courtiers is pushing them to suspect all newcomers

Bard’s part, as the memory of the Battle of Five Armies

- making an enemy out of any one of them would be a

grows dim (even if the Elvenking shows less and less

bad idea, as Bard treasures their friendship and opinion

interest in the dealings of Men and Dwarves). Bard’s

above any other consideration.

rule is recognised in some measure in nearby Esgaroth,

especially since Bard’s marriage with Una of Dorwinion.

If encountered face to face, King Bard appears as a man
wise beyond his age. He is quick to recognise the worth

King Bard is a stern, practical man, still very tied

of an individual, and easily befriends any Northman

to his previous life as a captain. Held by many to be

showing a daring temperament and an interest in military

grim and sometimes proud, he is universally considered

endeavours. By 2956, Bard is still actively trying to

to be forthright and true to his word. His queen, Una

strengthen his realm and encourages all adventurers to

of Dorwinion, has given him a son, Bain, who is seven

come to Dale. He is ready to reward their deeds and use

years old in 2956. Bard holds court in the Royal

them as an example to his people.

Palace of Dale for the most part of the year, when he

41

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The second council is called in Lake-town in the last days
of November. The meeting has been moved from Dale at
the request of King Bard. He fears that if the council is
again held in his halls, others will claim that he is trying
to assert his authority over the North, instead of being
counted as an equal to the other leaders.

Companions as Envoys
Any character with a Standing of 4 or more may be chosen
as a representative of his people, to attend the council and
speak. However, each faction has only a single vote at the
council, and that vote is cast by an envoy.
•

•

•

King Bard of Dale will speak for the Bardings, King
Dáin for the Dwarves of the Lonely Mountain and the
Master of Lake-town for the Men of the Lake. Beorn
also attends in person - it is the first time he has been
east of the forest since the Battle of Five Armies.
Thranduil the Elvenking won’t be present at the
council, so there’s room for a companion to be chosen.
If no Elf in the company volunteers or is of sufficient
standing, the King selects an emissary. If Ruithel is still
alive and the Wayward Elves’ influence is unchecked,
then Thranduil sends her to demand that the human
trespass in the Woodland Realm ceases; if Ruithel is
dead or if she is not aligned with the Wayward Elves,
he sends his son Legolas Greenleaf.
The envoy of the Woodmen is elected by the Houses at a
folk-moot in Woodmen-town at Midsummer. Ingomer
of Woodland Hall chooses not to go, and Fridwald of
Woodmen-town agrees that a younger candidate is
needed. If Mogdred is part of the Woodmen he stands
for the position, but his choice is not supported by
many at the folk-moot and a companion with sufficient
Standing might challenge him and be elected in his
place. Ceawin of the East Bight does not propose
himself as a candidate, but goes to the council as a
representative of his own folk. If neither Mogdred or a
companion stand for the position, a Woodman healer
named Gailar goes as the envoy of the Wood.

Radagast’s absence will be noted at the Council of the
North. He remains by the Black Tarn, spending long hours
staring out over the murky waters. Gandalf the Grey does
not attend either – at least, not officially. He does not sit
42

on the council or appear in public, but some say the old
man is at work behind the scenes, giving counsel to the
various lords and nobles of the North.

The Council at Lake-town
The Council of the North lasts for five days, starting
from the 25th of November. At this time, Esgaroth is
crowded with merchants, traders and peasants from the
neghbouring lands who come to the city for the end of the
harvest season. If the companions reach Lake-town early,
they might take part in the Dragontide, the three-day
festival held to celebrate the death of Smaug the Dragon.
(Dragontide begins on the 1st of November - see the Laketown Guide).
The envoys sent to the Council of the North meet every
day at the Town-hall. Some of the meetings are held in
the Justice Room, the private chamber at the west end
of the building, but others are open to petitioners and
messengers in the larger main hall.
The news of the coming of Beorn, the fabled skinchanger,
the killer of Bolg son of Azog, has spread like fire through all
the town, and a crowd assembles every morning outside
the hall. But the real source of wonder for the folk of Laketown quickly becomes fair Una, the Queen of Dale; the
streets and quays of the Town-hall’s quarter are thronged
by men, women and children who sing songs to praise her
beauty and grace. Even the envoys of the Elvenking cannot
escape her exotic charm, and the fascination of her deep,
dark eyes and dusky complexion.

Bright Days, Dark Words
Unfortunately, the council doesn’t proceed as joyously:
weighty topics are discussed, and every issue is rehashed
and debated over and over, but soon shadows of fear and
doubt seem to take hold of many speakers, especially
during the meetings held in the private chamber. The two
strongest voices – King Bard and King Dáin – are focused
on rebuilding their own kingdoms and are unwilling to
take an inspiring lead. Unless the heroes speak up, the
council accomplishes little.
Matters discussed in the great hall include:
•

The quarrel between the Viglundings and the
Beornings: None of the Free Folk have any liking for

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

Viglund, and some argue that an alliance of the council
members could crush the cruel slaver. King Bard points
out that Mirkwood lies between Dale and Viglund’s
land, and that all paths around the forest are perilous
for an army. In the end, Beorn cuts the discussion
short – he will not have killing in his name without due
cause. If Viglund provokes him again, then he will act.

Not all the Beornings are happy with this. Some whisper
that Beorn is growing a little old and lazy, and wonder
what will happen when he is gone.
•

Trade in the North: Dáin, Bard and the Master of Laketown spend many hours discussing trade. Previously,
the Woodmen and Beornings had little part of such
discussions, but now the Beornings control the
crossings of the Anduin and the folk of the East Bight
help feed Lake-town and Dale. King Bard says that the
fertility and growing wealth of the Dalelands shall
bring prosperity to all, if they can defend it. He speaks
of threats from the East, and the growing menace of
banditry. He ends with a speech inviting folk of good
character to come to the Dalelands, where there is
plenty of farmland and a great need of strong arms.

Some of the younger Woodmen mutter about leaving
Mirkwood and becoming farmers or soldiers in Dale, for
the pleasant open lands seem to offer better prospects
than the gloomy forest.
•

The felling of timber in the Woodland Realm: The Elves
raise the problem of Men trespassing in the eastern
parts of the Woodland Realm and felling trees. The
men of Dale counter that there are no other trees
within many miles of the Lonely Mountain because of
the Desolation of the Dragon.

A compromise is suggested where the Elves show the
foresters which trees are allowed to be felled, but the
Elves are unhappy with allowing any Men into their land.
Another compromise is that the Men of Dale buy all their
timber from the Elves at Lake-town, but the folk of Dale
argue that they should not have to pay to fell trees that
are, in their eyes, free for all to take.
•

The settlements in the East Bight: If Ceawin the
Generous was rejected by the Woodmen, then the
43

council raises the question of the new settlements –
can they trust this new lord?
Other topics discussed in private in the Justice Room:
•

Expanding the Council: The Master of Lake-town raises
the suggestion of expanding the council, perhaps by
offering a place to other Northman nobles. The matter
is debated without conclusion.

•

Dol Guldur: The growing Shadow in the south cannot
be denied. King Dáin asks where the Wizards are, for
such matters are in their purview. The council decides
to send a message to Radagast and ask for his advice.
After word from Saruman arrives, they extend the
same request to him and Gandalf.

•

Rumours from the South: The matter of Sauron is
briefly discussed. Only the Elves remember the Last
Alliance as anything other than ancient legend. For
the Men and Dwarves, Mordor is a distant rumour
and the Dark Lord is a bugbear from children’s stories.

Elves may try to make the mortals understand the threat
posed by Sauron, but it is hard for any Man to grasp a
menace that seems to belong to myth. A cynical councillor
from Esgaroth interjects abruptly, “Sauron is immortal,
like the Elves. What good does it to do us to meddle in the
affairs of immortals?”
Messengers and petitioners include:
•

Mogdred: Whether or not he is part of the Woodmen,
Mogdred approaches the council with a proposal. If
the Old Forest Roard was to be rebuilt, it would greatly
strengthen the North. His men have the strength and
numbers to help Bofri the Dwarf rebuild it. If the
council approves this option, then Mogdred’s aid will
allow the road to be reopened within ten years.

•

Frár the Dwarf: Frár the Beardless (Heart of the
Wild, page 22) addresses the council, asking for help
reclaiming the Greydelve. Everyone – even Dáin –
counsels patience. The armies of the North are not
strong enough to countenance another war against
the Orcs.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

•

Messengers from the East and North: Travellers speak
to the council, talking of new Orc armies breeding
under Mount Gundabad, of Wargs prowling the Vales
of Anduin, and of strangers coming out of the East in
ever greater numbers.

A Messenger from Isengard
On the last day of the council, a messenger arrives on a
magnificent white horse. It’s a swarthy Man with long,
black hair, in his thirties. He carries a long spear with a
sharp bronze head and wears clothing of superior make
under a travelling cloak; a large key jangles at his waist.
He does not bow, but haughtily addresses the assembled
kings as equals, speaking in a strange accent. “I am
Drustan, messenger of Saruman the White. I come to you
now with a message of hope from the wisest of the Wise.”
Drustan is a Man from a land in the south called Dunland,
now serving the White Wizard. He addresses the council
in closed session, saying that Saruman will soon come to
Mirkwood to study Dol Guldur. For the next three years,
the White Wizard will reside in Rhosgobel with his brother
Radagast, and any who wish to learn of the ways of the
Enemy may learn from him…

The Assassin
An assassin has come to Lake-town to kill King Bard.
The culprit is Hunald, a Woodman who disappeared in

44

Mirkwood in 2954 while searching for treasure. He is
a master bowman, and carries a quiver holding three
arrows whose heads were forged in Angmar. His plan is
to climb the roof of a warehouse in the Shipyards’ district,
to get a view on the market-pool where king Bard and his
retinue will board his royal boat for the journey back to
Dale.
Hunald is not completely in control of himself - in
Mirkwood he encountered the Messenger of Mordor who
put the Shadow of Fear upon him (see page 127), and sent
him to Esgaroth on this murderous mission.
The companions may get a chance to stop Hunald if
anyone in the group shows a concern for the security of
the emissaries sent to the city for the Council of the North.
Companions who keep an eye open on unusual
occurrences (and who are especially Wary, for example)
might become suspicious of a Woodman hunter who
drinks alone in an inn in Esgaroth one or two evenings
before the end of the council.

Hunald, Spellbound Assassin
Attribute Level:
Distinctive Features:
Relevant skills:
			

5
Mistrustful, Brooding
Awareness, Sword ♦♦♦, 			
Great Bow ♦♦♦

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

Year 2957

A Tragic Death
If Hunald is not exposed before, the assassin will carry out
his plan. He takes position on the roof of the warehouse he
chose the day before, and when Bard and Queen Una stop
on the quay to address the crowd that gathered to bid the
royal couple farewell, the archer stands up, bends his bow
and quickly send three arrows flying, the last leaving the
string before the first finds its target.

Events
Saruman the Wise takes up residence in Rhosgobel for a
time. He dwells not with his fellow Wizard, but in a cottage
within the tall hedge protecting the town. His servant,
Drustan, is never far away, and three tall, dark-eyed Men,
seemingly belonging to the same southern folk, help the
Dunlending with the daily chores. During the Fellowship
phases of this year (not only the one at Year’s End),
companions at Rhosgobel may confer with Saruman,
gaining the advantages coming with the associated
undertaking (see Confer with Saruman, page 50).

What follows is complete chaos - the assembled crowd
witness in dismay as Bard is hit on the shoulder by the
first arrow and Queen Una turns to shield his beloved
husband and is pierced by the other two black darts. The
bodyguards of the King close around the couple, while
six Royal Archers send a hail of arrows in the direction
of the attack - but it’s too late, Hunald has disappeared
from sight. The body of the archer is found some time later
- he threw himself into the cold waters of the Long Lake
immediately after the attack.

The arrival of Saruman snaps Radagast out of his gloomy
reverie, and the Brown Wizard is once again seen coming
and going in and around Rhosgobel, always announced
and followed by flocks of excited birds. He is still not in
his best shape, though, and it is about at this time that the
once powerful and determined Wizard loses the respect
of Saruman.

When the town guard finally succeeds in placating the
crowd and containing the tumult, the full horror of the
truth emerges: King Bard is not grievously wounded and
will recover quickly, but the Queen is dead.

After several years of relative peace, the howl of the
Werewolf is heard along the East Bight.

Examining the black darts shot at the royal couple
identifies them as the work of Angmar of old (the origin
is clear to a hero with Shadow-lore or Elven-lore). If this
piece of information spreads, it immediately raises the
suspicion among the common folk that the assassin
was hired by the Elves, because of the recent disputes
between the Woodland Realm and Dale (“Who could
have provided such a terrible and ancient weapon if not
Elves!”).

The Messenger of Mordor and the Ghost of the Forest
return to Dol Guldur and consult with the Lieutenant. The
Messenger then rides to Mordor to seek new orders from
their dark master, while the Ghost is sent to haunt the forest
in the vicinity of Rhosgobel, to spy on the Woodmen. All
three fear the presence of the White Wizard in Mirkwood.
On his way south, the Messenger of Mordor rides through
the East Bight, awakening more Wood-wights as he goes.
If Ceawin is in the thrall of the Wights, then he meets with
the Messenger of Mordor by night.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Despair, rumour and suspicion about the assassination of
Queen Una reign in Dale and Lake-town all winter. King
Bard mourns his wife by refusing to see anyone but his
closest counsellors.

Adventuring Phase:
The Siege of Black Tarn Hall
This adventure determines the fate of Black Tarn Hall.
If the companions are unable to save the village, it is
abandoned forever and plays no further part in the
Darkening of Mirkwood.

This winter is again harsh and cold, and wolves prowl
even at the gates of Woodmen-town. The rating for all
holdings is raised by two again.
45

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

What is the state of the village of Amaleoda at this stage
of the campaign? Is it a small collection of muddy shacks,
or has it become a stronghold of the Woodmen? Does
the shieldmaiden rule from a sturdy longhouse, or is the
village still unfortified? Are there only a few surly fisherfolk
living here, or have their numbers grown? What of their
allies – are they friendly with the Men of the Tyrant’s Hill?
Do they trade with the East Bight? Or do they stand alone
and friendless?
There are many possible reasons for the company to be in
Black Tarn Hall. Woodmen heroes may be there to trade
or to visit relatives. Companions working for a patron
may be on their way back from a scouting mission in the
vicinity of Dol Guldur. The characters might be searching
for the treasure of the Black Tarn, or looking for the advice
of Radagast.

Choking Weeds and Yelling Goblins
The first threat to the village comes in early summer, in
the form of fast-growing weeds. They appear almost
overnight, sprouting with unnatural quickness along the
shoreline and wrapping themselves around the small
boats used by the Woodmen.
In a span of a week or so, most of the boats are so engulfed
by the weeds that they cannot be used, and the air by the
lakeside becomes unwholesome, as the weeds release a
sick stench as they dry in the sun.
The Woodmen have only a few days to contemplate this
strange development, when news reach Amaleoda of a
worse turn of events. Hunters return from the woods to
the south and east of the village, bringing tidings of an
infestation of Forest Goblins! The trees literally crawl with
the nasty critters, and their presence has deserted the area
of all animals. Something must have driven the otherwise
craven creatures out of their holes in the south.

A Siege
The stinking vapours rising from the lake and the
incessant sound of the bleating Goblin-horns echoing
in the surrounding woods make the situation very clear
for the inhabitants of Black Tarn Hall. With the lake and
river chocked by noxious weeds and the woods infested
by Goblins, the Woodmen can’t catch the fish and game
46

they need to sustain themselves. It won’t be long before
the Woodmen start to suffer from hunger.
The village has some fortune left to it – the Orcs cannot
abide sunlight, and the village has been built in the open
ground near the lake, without trees to shade it. But soon
the Goblins will try the defences of the village and attack
it at night.
Amaleoda asks the companions for counsel; the current
situation cannot be sustained for long. How can the
Woodmen try to free the woods of the threat of the
Goblins? Should she remain to hold the village while the
companions go to find help? And if they go for allies,
where do they go? Rhosgobel is close by, but there are
few warriors there. Woodmen-town is populous, and
if the companions take the river it is a faster road – but
can they find help in time? Finally, the infested woods
stand between Black Tarn Hall and the Tyrant’s Hill, but
if they could get help from Mogdred, together they could
reasonably try to get rid of the Forest Goblins.
All solutions seem equally difficult. What will the
companions suggest?

The River-maiden Uncloaked
Two days after the beginning of the ‘siege’ of Black Tarn
Hall, a pale mist rises from the waters of the lake. In the
mid-afternoon, a woman emerges from it and walks into
the village. Her beauty is heart-breaking, but cold, like a
waterfall frozen by a hard winter. Her eyes gleam with a
strange malice, and she wears a rippling corslet of shining
armour.
“Children of the wood, children of my blood,” she says,
“long have you dwelt in the care of me and my sisters.
Long have we been friends. Listen now – against the
coming darkness there can be no victory. I shall protect
you – follow me, and I will lead you to a place of safety!”
A successful Insight roll alerts the companions that she
is lying, if they have not already realised that Duskwater
is corrupt.
If the companions do not speak up against the Rivermaiden, then the folk of Black Tarn Hall listen to her,

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

An Invisible Hand

driven by their doubts and fears. The River-maiden leads
them into the mists… and they are never seen again. (If
the companions are foolish enough to follow the Rivermaiden, then they are ambushed by Orcs in the mist.)

The assault on Black Tarn Hall was provoked by one of the
three Nazgûl of Mirkwood, the Ghost of the Forest. It is to
do his bidding that the Forest Goblins have left their lairs
and have come to infest the woods surrounding Black
Tarn Hall. Only the terror they feel for the Ringwraith
overcomes the Goblins’ natural fear of becoming food for
the Spiders of Mirkwood. Should the Ghost of the Forest
relent his grip on the Goblins, they would immediately
flee back to their caves under Dol Guldur.

Convincing the villagers to reject the River-maiden requires
decisive action from the companions. Awe or Inspire
rolls are at TN 16, lower if the company can provide proof
of the River-maiden’s treachery.
If her offer is rejected, the Maiden laughs cruelly. She looks
at Amaleoda with her frozen eyes. “So be it. I will watch
as you and those who are so foolish to follow you slowly
starve. Then, one day, I’ll come to collect your bones, to
bring them to those who wait at the bottom of the lake.”
She vanishes, and suddenly a thick fog rolls in off the
Black Tarn. The weak light of the sun cannot penetrate the
grey mists. Every companion loses a point of Hope as the
villagers despair.

To avoid letting his control of the Orcs slip away, the Ghost
of the Forest has chosen to haunt the moss-covered cairn
that emerges out of the marshy ground, near the northeastern shore of the lake. Here, a group of Marsh-dwellers
(see the Loremaster’s Guide, page 139) have been hiding
among the willow-trees since they arrived there in 2955.
The companions may become aware of the terrifying
presence of the Ghost of the Forest if they investigate
the coming and going of the Marsh-dwellers. In fact, the
horrid creatures may be spied as they lurk at the fringe of
every fight, waiting for a chance to steal corpses for their
cooking-pots.

The Raids Begin
Five days into the siege, the Goblins start to encroach
the village, slowly moving through the canopy of
the encircling woods. The Orcs of Mirkwood are not
disciplined enough to attempt a full-fledged assault, so
they will come at night in gangs, in ragged war-bands, in
twos and threes, some already wounded and angry as a
consequence of an encounter with Spiders. They do not
expect resistance at first, so they attack recklessly, eager
for bloodshed.

Should the companions follow the Marsh-dwellers, they
will discover that the cannibalistic creatures have carried a
number of victims to the cairn (unless the Loremaster wants
to be particularly nasty, these are all Goblins and Orcs). If
they have been to the cairn before, the heroes find the place
to be even more desolate than before: a lingering sense of
terror makes the air thick and barely breathable, and no
creatures of the wild can be spied or heard in the vicinity.

The Loremaster should stage a fight based on what the
players decided to do so far. For example, Goblins may
crash through the door of the hall or cottage they are
sleeping in, or the companions may encounter enemies
along the streets of the village, as the critters revel in the
destruction of everything in their sight. Most opponents
are Forest Goblins (see page 132), but a very small
contingent of Mordor Orcs (see the Loremaster’s Guide,
page 72) has come to reinforce their ranks.

A Dead Giveaway
At least one among the unfortunate guests of the Marshdwellers is still alive, and very keen at not being eaten!
It is a Messenger of Lugbúrz, an Orc of Mordor, come
to Mirkwood all the way from the South. He complains
loudly about his miserable fate, and perceiving the dark
presence of the Ghost of the Forest he addresses him
directly, pleading for his life.

The first night of raids is won as soon as the companions
kill at least two enemies each. The Orcs clamber back into
the shadow of the forest, sounding the retreat on their
war-horns. But this was just the first night of raids; more
attacks will follow, every night claiming more lives.

“Help me! I know you are here! You are one of them, you
can flay the skin off these corpse-eating buggers! Shrieker!
Nazgûl! Free me, please!”
47

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Obedient to the will of his master who doesn’t want to
reveal the true power of his most trusted servants yet, the
Ghost of the Forest ignores the request. Overlooking the
presence of the companions is another matter entirely…

Saruman the Wise to aid them. Radagast is eager to go,
even if what the companions say of Duskwater troubles
him visibly, but the White Wizard is his superior in the
order and he does not dare act without his permission.

The Ringwraith can deal with the companions even if
unclad and invisible (see the stats for the Nazgûl in The
Appendix at the end of this guide, page 128). He won’t
communicate with the heroes in any way, but will harm
them with his many terrible weapons, to leave them weak
and vulnerable to the attacks of a group of Marsh-dwellers
(at least one creature for every companion).

Judging from what the companions say, Saruman fears
that the village is already lost, and that it would be better
to stay close to the protection offered by the Lamp of
Balthi. A dark tide is coming, he says, and it is better to
prepare a few fortresses of Men rather than try to save
every outpost.

Saving the Village
To save the village, the company must act quickly. Soon
the Woodmen will be defeated by the double onslaught of
bloodshed and hunger, and will start to leave Black Tarn
Hall to find refuge elsewhere. The characters must choose
what to do.
•

•

The woods encircling the village teem with Forest
Goblins. To leave the area on foot without being
spotted is a prolonged action requiring 5 rolls
(suggested skills are Stealth, of course, but possibly
Athletics to climb trees, or Explore, to find the better
path to follow). The difficulty is TN 18, unless the
companions set up a diversion or come up with some
other clever stratagem. If the company fails to sneak
out of the village, they are ambushed by a group of
Forest Goblins led by an Orc-chieftain carrying a
great shield emblazoned with a red eye.
If they succeed, they can reach Rhosgobel in little
more than two days of march (see To Rhosgobel) or
head south across the Narrows of the Forest to call
Mogdred for help (see The Tyrant’s Hill). Otherwise,
the company can search for a boat where the choking
weeds are thin enough - boarding it, the companions
can paddle all the way to Woodmen-town; the Goblins
do not have boats, and the Nazgûl does not chase
them along the flowing river (see To Woodmen-town).

To Rhosgobel
Rhosgobel lies within three days of March from the Black
Tarn. If the companions successfully make their way
through the forest of Mirkwood, they may try to convince
48

His reaction is very different should the companions
provide proof of the presence of a Ringwraith in
Mirkwood. In that case, the White Wizard immediately
commands the companions to lead him to where the
wraith was perceived last. A light is set blazing in the dark
eyes of Saruman, and he doesn’t waste any more time
but immediately calls for Drustan and his men. Saruman
then urges Radagast to stay behind in Rhosgobel, and
leaves with the companions in haste (See Saruman
Revealed in Wrath, on the opposite page).

To Woodmen-town
Woodmen-town is sixty miles north along the Dusky River;
it takes a boat about six days to reach it (and two Fatigue
tests), and three days more (and another Fatigue test) to
return to Black Tarn Hall. But the companions are sure to
find there enough warriors to face the threat of the Forest
Goblins. The Woodmen have long been enemies of Dol
Guldur, and word of Orcs may bring every fighting-man
and shieldmaiden to the river’s edge: a well-addressed
speech has every available boat take to the river in a
day, while a long throng of warriors heads south on the
western shore of the Dusky River.
The downside of this choice is that it will take at least ten
days for the host of the Woodmen to reach the Black Tarn.
By the time the Woodmen reach the village, the Goblins
have set fire to the longhouse of Amaleoda, and the valiant
shieldmaiden has lost her life in a desperate last stand to
defend her folk.

The Tyrant’s Hill
A third unlikely choice is there for the companions to
choose. To the south lies the Tyrant’s Hill, across nearly

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

fifty miles of thick woodland (7 days of travel, two Fatigue
tests, and then back again). If Mogdred is an ally of the
Woodmen, then he sends aid as soon as he hears of the
trouble. He also has his men find the captain of his border
guard and has him whipped to death as punishment for
failing to spot the advancing Goblins.
Strangely, the Orcs learn of Mogdred’s march long in
advance, and fall back immediately instead of giving him
battle… almost as if they were warned. Mogdred is praised
for saving Black Tarn Hall, as the Goblins break their siege
before they can burn the longhouse of Amaleoda, but he
does it without inflicting any damage on the forces of Dol
Guldur.

Saruman Revealed in Wrath
Never in their life have the companions have seen a
Wizard prepare for such a confrontation - as they move
to meet the Ghost of the Forest, Saruman seems oblivious
to anything and anyone; he rapidly advances across any
terrain with sure strides and never ceases to speak arcane
words and ancient rhymes in a low voice.
Whatever the distance separating the company from the
bog where the haunted ruins rise, the journey appears to
take only minutes - when the heroes finally snap out of
their trance, they find themselves along the shore of the

49

Black Tarn, facing a group of slavering Marsh-dwellers.
Saruman is still among the companions, and seems to
stand above them like a tall pillar of white stone.
The Voice of Saruman suddenly resounds within their
heads - distant, yet clear and comforting, like the sound of
the ocean resonating inside a conch shell.
“Fight now, my worthy friends! And pray that I didn’t
come too late to face this ruin. A shadow has come that is
beyond the strength of the mind and body of any of you.”
A moment, and then Saruman is gone with a white flash;
the Marsh-dwellers yell covering their eyes - the light to
them was as blinding as the stroke of lightning. The fight
will start with the creatures being surprised and the
company holding the initiative. There are two Marshdwellers for any companion.
Should the heroes prevail against the dangerous swamp
creatures, they will discover that Saruman has driven
away the darkness and what generated it. The Ghost of the
Forest has fled before the power unleashed by the White
Wizard, and the host of Forest Goblins has dispersed to
the four winds. Even the Marsh-dwellers seem to have
retreated to where they came from. Peace returns to Black
Tarn Hall.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Saruman remains a guest of Amaleoda for the following
three days. For the length of his permanence, Drustan
and his men never cease to search the area, concentrating
their efforts around the marshy grounds along the north
shore of the lake, where the cairn is located. Finally, the
Wizard leaves to return to Rhosgobel.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
As stated previously under the Events section for the
current year, companions at Rhosgobel may confer with
Saruman, but meeting the White Wizard may have its side
effects…
•

A company who meets Saruman is enchanted by his
wisdom and nobility and must take him as a patron.
Saruman communicates with his followers mainly
through Drustan, his messenger. He asks little of his
followers, save that they report any strange events
or rumours to him: during a Fellowship phase, a
companion in the same location of Saruman or
Drustan may choose the Meet Patron undertaking
to deliver important information to the Wizard and
gain one Experience point in return (the Loremaster
determines if the information the companions deliver
is deemed important by the Wizard or not; anything
concerning Gandalf is important, for example).

When companions are spending a Fellowship phase in

to the words of Saruman the White, great among the
Wise of Middle-earth.

A companion who has spent a Fellowship phase
Saruman

may

gain

his

Despite having promised to stay for three years, Saruman
leaves in haste in late spring, following a visit from
Gandalf the Grey. The pair ride away south, in pursuit of
rumours of the Messenger of Mordor.
If Black Tarn Hall was not saved, then the survivors of the
siege abandon the ’cursed lake’ and come to Rhosgobel
and Woodmen-town in search of a new home. If any
character has a holding in that area, then Woodmen come
looking for work and shelter.
Brigands ambush a raft en route to the Elvenking’s halls.
They capture the crew and spill the barrels of Dorwinion
wine into the river. One of the Elves struggles, and in the fray
she is stabbed to death. Rumours claim that the brigands
were Men of Dale from the villages on the forest’s edge.
Three children go missing from a Barding hamlet near the
forest’s edge. One boy returns a week later, claiming that
“beautiful Elves” took him and his two younger siblings
away to a magical feast. In fact, the children were taken
by the Wayward Elves (see also the entry for Year 2970,
page 98). Other children may go missing in later years, to
return in the same way.

Swarthy strangers from the East arrive in Dale in late
summer. They speak the common tongue with a barbarous
accent, and say they are escaping a civil war that is raging
in their land. They ask for the protection of the Bardings.

a location where he can be met, they may go and listen

with

Events

Word comes from Mountain Hall that a great many
Goblins are moving under the mountains. Hartfast son of
Hartmut calls for aid.

New Fellowship Phase Undertaking:
Confer with Saruman

conferring

Year 2958

next

Adventuring Phase:
Saving the Maiden

Lore level at half the cost in Advancement points.
Alternatively, if the company does not have a warden,

Saruman may educate one hero in the dark ways of

When the Western Eaves of Mirkwood return to life with
the breaking of spring, Radagast the Brown seems to
awaken with renewed vigour. The Wizard of Wilderland
summons the company to his home in Rhosgobel. He is

the Enemy: the character gains the Shadow-lore
Trait - at the cost of a permanent Shadow point.

50

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

gem of unusual beauty, to excite the legendary lust of the
Spiders for such treasure and use it to their advantage.
If asked, Radagast explains that Spiders of great age
can suck the light from gemstones, and that jewels are a
delicacy to them.

visibly troubled and questions the companions closely,
asking them to describe every interaction they had with
the River-maidens in recent years.
If the heroes mention Duskwater’s gossamer armour,
Radagast seems startled. If pressed, the Brown Wizard
confesses that the companions’ testimony confirms his
gravest suspicions: there is a terrible Spider-creature in
Mirkwood, he tells the company, one of three ancient
monsters descended from Ungoliant herself! She is
called Tyulqin, and she is the Weaver. Her silken threads
are bound with dreadful spells, and conjure illusions so
powerful they can even delude a spirit like a River-maiden.

Acquiring a Suitable Gem
There are a few options for the company to acquire

a stone of extraordinary worth: The Roadwarden’s

Staff (see page 29) is topped with a large pearl.

King Thranduil is especially fond of precious stones

and has many white gems in his treasury. Green

Breaking the Spell

gems are also favoured among his folk. The hoard

of Smaug too contained many precious crystals and

Radagast does not know exactly what must be done to free
Duskwater from the Spider’s curse, but he is certain that
the company must find the monster that keeps the Rivermaiden in thrall. But they won’t go alone, for the Wizard will
accompany them (for the second time, if the companions
went with Radagast to Dol Guldur in Secrets Buried).

other jewels of great worth; most of that wealth is to
be found today in Dale, Lake-town, and especially in
the treasure halls of the Dwarves of Erebor. Finally,

the folk of Mountain Hall in the Misty Mountains
sometimes find gemstones in their mines.

Tyulqin’s lair lies somewhere deep in Mirkwood, but she is
a secretive monster, and can wrap her refuge in powerful
illusions and deceits so that it will never be found even
by the best hunter from the races of Men or Elves. (If the
companions have encountered Tyulqin before and believe
they know where she is to be found, Radagast tells them
that the valley they entered was only one of her traps,
not her lair). To discover the whereabouts of Tyulqin, the
company must go into the Heart of Mirkwood and attend
the Parliament of Spiders.

Into the Heart of Mirkwood
The Parliament is located deep in the Heart of Mirkwood
(Heart of the Wild, page 99). It is reputed to be
approximately one hundred miles east of Woodmentown. Such a journey would test the endurance and the
spirit of even the hardiest traveller, but Radagast the
Wizard leads the companions, and his arts make the
journey easier.

Every few years, Radagast says, the Spiders of Mirkwood
gather in an eerie parliament (Heart of the Wild, page
101). Through his spies in the birds and beasts, he has
learned the location of the next session. If Tyulqin is
there they can follow her back to her lair, but she rarely
attends the gathering. If she is not, then they may be able
to persuade the other Spiders to tell them where she lives
- Spiders are not like the other animals of the forest, says
Radagast with contempt, and they quarrel and fight as
easily as Men and Elves do.

•

It takes the company only 12 days and three Fatigue
tests to reach the Parliament, approximately half of
what it would have taken to get there if they were
travelling without Radagast. The TN of each Fatigue
tests is only 16.

•

The Wizard’s presence makes the experience of
travelling across the rotten core of Mirkwood a less
unsavoury one - even so, each companion must pass
four Corruption tests at TN 16.

Finally, Radagast carries a flask of his Mirkwood
cordial, enough for six sips. Sipping from the flask once
a day restores a number of Endurance points equal to the

And luckily they are also equally greedy: in fact, Radagast
prompts the companions to find and carry with them a
51

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

drinker’s favoured Heart score plus the roll of a Success
die. Radagast doesn’t let anyone drink from the flask
more than once a day.

astoundingly beautiful rubies. These gems were given to
the Spiders by the Messenger of Mordor in 2951, and each
one of them is beyond priceless.

Attending the Parliament

If the companions place the jewel they brought with them
into the chest, the Spiders escort them into the Parliament.

Through the deep gloom that hangs eternally from
the tangled boughs in the Heart of Mirkwood, the
companions see a glimmer of light. This is not the sun, nor
the delicate silver radiance of the moon, but an unnatural,
sickly shimmering glow. As they draw closer, they see a
great clearing in the forest, entirely filled with the largest
expanse of Spider-webs any of them have ever seen. It is
a castle woven in silk, a city of Spiders, a hall of sticky
strands.

Addressing the Spiders
This is a scene out of an arachnophobe’s nightmare.
Spiders are everywhere – big and small, thin and fat, some
black as night, others a weird iridescent green or a sickly
pale colour like infected pus with legs. One particularly
knobbly fat Spider seems to be in charge of ceremonies,
and old Kch-Thk squats next to it. There are three huge
webs that the companions realise must be the equivalent
of thrones, but these lie empty for the moment.

Radagast whispers at the company to be silent, but it is
too late – hundreds of Spiders suddenly spill out of the
trees and surround them. Radagast slams his staff into
the ground, and the many-legged creatures seem to freeze
on the spot, with only a thin creaking and bubbling issuing
from their mouths betraying their anger. “Talk to them”,
Radagast hisses, as he concentrates as if the Spiders were
held at bay by his very thought.

“Order! Order!” cries the chair-Spider. “Sit down, flygobblers and web-spinners! Cease your chattering! The
Elders are coming!”
Then, as if summoned by his words, a spidery thing drags
itself past the companions and struggles up to the leftmost
web-throne. Fat Sarquin is monstrously, obscenely fat and
bloated; the soft flesh of her abdomen pulsates and leaks
as her attendants struggle to push her up into her seat.
Around her, the lesser Spiders squeak “Mother-of-All!
Mother-of-All!”

One of the company should then volunteer and beg leave
to attend the Parliament. The Spiders chitter amongst
themselves for a moment. Heroes with one or more points
of Shadow understand a few words of what they say, but
after a brief while a pair of Spiders scuttle off and return
in the company of a weird man with a tangled beard
and crazed eyes. He wears nothing but a loin-cloth, and
thousands of tiny Spider hatchlings dwell in his beard.
He speaks the Common Speech and understands the
language of his Spider-masters. In fact, it seems that he
thinks he is a Spider himself. He introduces himself as
”Man-Talk-Slave-Meat”, Kch-thk in the Spider’s language
(he is a Wild Man of Mirkwood, see Heart of the Wild,
page 118).

Eight eyes fix on the companions. If they fail this encounter,
she’ll eat them (see the Appendix on page 134 for Sarqin’s
stats and abilities).

Set Tolerance
Three things keep the Spiders from eating the companions
– what they gave to attend the Parliament, the presence
of sharp swords and Radagast. The Tolerance for this
encounter is set at half the Valour of the strongest
companion, modified as follows:

The Spiders say that they will permit the companions to
attend for a suitable price - which of them is the fattest
and juiciest? If, as they presumably will, the characters
proffer a gemstone instead, then a big Spider scuttles over
carrying a black chest. It flips the chest lid open with one
hairy leg, revealing a small cache of gemstones. Most are
of little worth, but resting atop the other stones are two

•
•
•
•
52

-1 if they offered anything but a gem as surety
+1 if they offered a gemstone
-1 for every Hobbit in the company (tales of Bilbo’s
deeds have spread far and wide in Mirkwood)
+1 if there is a Woodman or Elf of Mirkwood

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

can try to be guileful and use Riddle, or proceed in any
way the players see fit. Unfortunately, the Spiders are
not willing to reveal where Tyulqin is to be found, either
because they fear her or because they don’t know. However,
a successful Insight test suggests that Tauler is willing to
talk to the companions afterwards, and this is true – once
the companions leave the Parliament, fleeing or not, he
follows them into the woods (see Meeting Tauler).

Conclusions
If the companions exceed the Tolerance of the encounter,
then Sarqin’s belly rumbles and she decides that
her appetite is more important than diplomacy: she
attacks! Fortunately, Radagast wants to avoid a direct
confrontation with such a powerful creature and, with
a spell he has been preparing since the beginning of the
encounter, he hides the company from the multiple eyes
of the assembled creatures! The heroes disappear and the
Parliament of Spiders is momentarily stunned, allowing
the companions to flee the place - there are far too many
Spiders to kill.

Introduction

If the companions do not exceed the Tolerance of the
Spiders, then compare the number of successful rolls the
companions achieved during the episode with the entries
given below.

The companions should use Courtesy to introduce
themselves and explain that they are looking for Tyulqin.
Radagast can speak for the company, but prefers to stay
silent and prepare for a quick escape if it becomes necessary.

0-3: The Spiders barely tolerate the companions to finish
talking. They grow visibly impatient, and will hunt them
as soon as they leave the assembly.

Interaction

4-6: The companions entertain or otherwise arouse the
curiosity of the Spiders and obtain safe passage through
the Heart of Mirkwood - this time.

The companions need to find out where Tyulqin’s lair is, as
she is evidently is not attending the Parliament. But soon
after the conversation starts, another huge Spider arrives
and takes the rightmost throne. Characters who played
through The Staff of the Roadwarden recognise this beast
(and worse, he may remember them) as Tauler the Hunter.
Tauler hates his sister Tyulqin with a fierce loathing. He
announces to the Parliament that Tyulqin will not attend
because she ”serves the agent of the Dark Lord”. (Kch-tck
will not translate this, but companions with one or more
points of Shadow can catch this).

7 or more: the Spiders are surprised, they have never
enjoyed the presence of food without eating it so much in
the past! Apply the results of 4-6 above; additionally, the
Spiders let their thrall Kch-tck accompany them until they
leave the borders of the Heart of Mirkwood (the presence
of the Spider-slave reduces the TN of any roll made by the
company as they traverse Mirkwood by one level).

Meeting Tauler

At this point, the companions can ask the assembly of
Spiders for information directly using Persuade, or they

For so huge a creature, Tauler moves with unnatural
stealth. He creeps right up on the companions before
53

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

or trusting anything in the cave; they need all their resolve
and clarity of mind if they dare to explore the deepest
tunnels of the Spider’s lair. Only by going there they might
be able to discover and break the enchantments that keep
the River-maiden in thrall.

they spot his elephantine bulk scuttling through the trees.
The Spider hisses and speaks in a mangled version of the
Common Tongue, and says “Peeeeaaaceee” instead of
attacking.
Tauler has a simple offer. He hates his sister. He knows
where she hides, but cannot enter it because of the
powerful web-wards she weaves to protect her lair. If the
companions destroy her magic webs, then he will be able
to murder his sister. A roll of Insight (TN 16) may reveal
that Tauler intends to blame the murder of Tyulqin on the
companions, to avoid angering the other Spiders. If the
characters go along with this, they will find themselves
to be sworn enemies of the Spiders of Mirkwood forever –
but how do they say no to Tauler?

Spider Magic
Tyulqin has woven a number of spells to protect her
hideout: the companions must break them to get to the
centre of the cave. Each companion is targeted by at
least one spell before they reach the Heart of the Lair (see
opposite page); the bulleted entries below describe the
effects of the various enchantments.
Heroes targeted by a spell can perceive the illusion as
they did during their previous encounter with Tyulqin:
by proposing and succeeding in a roll of Insight when
subjected to a vision, or by getting a A result when
attempting any action and being allowed to make a
Wisdom test as a consequence (see The Lost Path, page
34). This time though, Insight rolls and Wisdom tests are
both rolled against TN 18.

If they accept, then Tauler will lead them to Tyulqin’s lair.

The Lair
Tyulqin has made her lair under a barren hill thirty miles
south-west of the Parliament. As they approach, they see
that the trees around the area are covered in some of
the most delicate, intricate webs, spun with a fine black
Spider-thread and similar to those they spied in the
valley in The Lost Path (Year 2954). This is a place of deep
Shadow, so Corruption tests must be made upon entering
and leaving, and if they tarry needlessly within.

Once a character sees through an illusion, he finds that
he can dispel it by cutting through a Spider-web nearby,
woven with the now-familiar fine black Spider-silk.
But breaking each web risks awakening Tyulqin: all the
characters must pass a Stealth test for each web that they
break. If at least one hero fails, then Tyulqin is alerted (see
Confronting Tyulqin, page 56).

When the company is finally in sight of the entrance to
Tyulqin’s lair, Tauler stops in his tracks and motions the
companions to continue; then, he slowly withdraws in the
darkness of Mirkwood. Inside the cave, the companions
discover that the walls are covered with macabre
traceries, beautifully grotesque frets composed of the
same black Spider-webs. Their intricacy remind any Elf
of something wrought from ithildin, and comparable
in artistry to the works of the High-elves of the West - if
they ever tried their hand at something so dreary and
cheerless.
Looking into these webs, the companions seem to see
faces or distant places or feel strange emotions. Why
would looking at a particular configuration of Spidersilk make a character feel sad, and another configuration
seem to bring nausea and a third trigger feeling like falling
in love? Radagast cautions the company against touching
54

•

Illusion of Enemies: On at least three occasions, a
hero sees enemies lunging out of dark corners and
side tunnels, and violently dodges and ducks to get
out of the way of their attacks. If the companion
does not break the enchantment, he inflicts a loss of
Endurance on himself equal to his Damage rating for
each delusional instance.

•

Webs of Misery: A character is convinced he is to
blame for something terrible that may befall the
company - either he believes he has accidentally
warned the Spider, something he chose to serve his
companions as food was poisoned, and so on. This
nagging doubt makes the hero temporarily Miserable
and will last until the company leaves the cave.

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

•

•

•

•

The Heart of the Lair

The False Passage: The character sees a web-choked
passageway that he is sure leads to the Spider’s
secret lair. If he convinces the company to follow this
direction, everyone loses eight Endurance points due
to the strain to get through.

If the characters make it to the heart of the lair without
alerting the Spider, they enter a large circular chamber.
Here, large strands of Spider-web hang as tapestries from
above and seem to suck the light out of any torch or lamp
the companions might be carrying. The gloom here is that
of the blackest of nights. Tyulqin herself clings to the dark
ceiling above, almost invisible. She slumbers, her alien
mind exploring some strange Spider-dream.

Seductive Spider: A companion has a vision revealing
that Tyulqin is in truth a most beautiful and desirable
woman trapped in a Spider’s body by the Dark Lord
himself. This delusion won’t permit the hero to attack
Tyulqin until the character is injured by the Spider or he
leaves the cave.

All companions must pass a Corruption test (TN 18) or
gain a point of Shadow; additionally, companions who
fail feel as if they are drowning in deep waters and have
trouble attempting any further action: as long as they
remain inside the chamber, their rolls fail automatically
upon an C result.

Horror of Poison: The character imagines a tiny Spider
dart out of a web, scuttle up his leg and bite him. The
character feels the agony of poison pumping through
his veins, feels his leg burn as though his blood had
turned to fire and is considered to be temporarily
Weary for as long as he remains in the cave.

After some distressing minutes of total blindness, all
companions start to see things once again, as if the
chamber was being revealed by the faintest luminescence
- Radagast is working his subtle magic.

Glimpse of Things to Come: Maybe not all of Tyulqin’s
webs are deceitful illusions. The companions sees
what he believes are a glimpse of things yet to come,
facts related to the character’s life and fate (possibly,
concerning the fate of a holding, of someone of
significance for the hero, a patron, a lord, a lover). The
spell hasn’t a temporary effect, but what the hero sees
might actually come true. Or not.

The River-maiden’s Trap
An enchanted web holding the River-maiden’s spell can be
seen directly under Tyulqin’s sleeping form. Looking at the
web, a silken spiral architecture covered in water-droplets,
the characters glimpse Duskwater’s terrified face. The
black web can be broken easily by throwing something at

55

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Enter Tauler

it, but this awakens the Spider. Sneaking up and gently
cutting the web requires a Stealth test at TN 18.

If the companions managed to destroy the River-maiden’s
web without awakening Tyulqin, they will need to sneak
past Tauler (Stealth, TN 16) – normally, getting past
the master hunter of Mirkwood would be harder, but
the monster is waiting for his sister to emerge so he can
ambush her.

The Girdle of Tyulqin
Around the perimeter of the chamber are seven pillars
of thick black webbing, each as big around as an Ogre’s
thigh. These webs form the magical girdle of Tyulqin, a
warding spell that keeps her siblings from entering her
lair unbidden. Breaking any one of these alerts Tyulqin but breaks the ward and lets Tauler in (see Confronting
Tyulqin, below).

If the companions have awoken Tyulqin, but also
destroyed her warding spell, then they need only survive
three rounds of battle before Tauler leaps into the fray. The
two Spiders stare at each other with their lifeless eyes for a
brief instant, then Tyulqin flees into the forest, with Tauler
hot on her heels. The companions will discover who won
the deadly confrontation only afterwards.

Cutting through a strand requires a successful Sword or
Dagger roll AND the expenditure of a point of Hope.

Confronting Tyulqin
If the company’s presence in the cave is revealed at any
time, then Tyulqin reacts with fury. The Spider-creature
descends on the company like a cloud of darkness and first
uses her Webs of Illusion ability to ambush the company;
then, she will employ her Stupefy spell to trap companions
in the thick webbing hanging virtually anywhere in her
lair. Finally, she will Strike Fear and poison her enemies
upon the first occasion (called shot).

To determine the winner, roll the Feat die.

What About Radagast?

6-10: Tauler kills Tyulqin, but is wounded and disappears
from all activity in Mirkwood for months on end.

C: Tyulqin weaves a desperate spell of command,
binding Tauler to her will. Both Spiders survive under
Tyulqin’s control.
1-5: Tyulqin kills Tauler, and now is consumed by an
undying hatred for the company.

Radagast cannot simply intervene and save the company
from the monster; he has been busy all along preserving
the group from the worst effects of entering a blighted
place like Tyulqin’s lair, and is already weary. But if things
seem to go catastrophically wrong, the Brown Wizard
may resort to desperate measures: if everything seems
lost, Radagast suddenly puts himself between Tyulqin
and the company, and smites the ground with his staff,
breaking it!

A: Both Spiders kill each other.

Return to the Black Tarn
The journey back to the Black Tarn takes another 12
days and three Fatigue tests, and the company must face
another round of four Corruption tests (all rolls at TN 16
- one does not simply walk into the Heart of Mirkwood!).
Radagast leads the company to the shore of the Black
Tarn. Already, the lake seems healthier – the foul weeds
are rotting, the water is clearer, the fog less dense. The
Wizard searches the shores of the lake for some time, until
he spots a group of Black Herons standing still: lying in the
rushes among them is the unmoving form of Duskwater.
She is pale as death and clearly very weak.

A blinding flash of light of many hues disperses the
strangling gloom of the Spider’s lair, repulsing back the
vast shape of the Child of Shelob for a time long enough to
let the company escape the place.
•

If Radagast breaks his staff to save the company, he
will secretly leave Rhosgobel right after the end of
the adventure. The Brown Wizard will return only in
2966, leaning upon a new staff, courtesy of the chief
of his Order, Saruman the White.

Showing unexpected strength, the Wizard lifts the maiden
out of the water and bids that the companions go fetch
a boat. There is only one place where her spirit can be
56

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

The Hall of the Lamp

fully healed of the Spider’s taint – the Hall of Balthi in
Woodmen-town. If she is not brought there the Rivermaiden will die.

If the companions convince Fridwald to let them into
the House, then Radagast arranges for the unmoving
body of Duskwater to be placed upon a bier on the dais,
close to where the lamp hangs. Then, the Wizard asks
the Woodmen to take down the Lamp of Balthi from its
place of honour. The Hall-warden, a woman in charge of
the keeping of the lamp, operates the chains and pulleys
that hold the lamp aloft, and lowers it. Then, she carefully
removes the glass case, exposing the Elven-lamp within
for all to see. The unfiltered blue light that issues from the
lamp washes over the assembly of bystenders.

To Woodmen-town
The characters’ boat seems to be hastened on its way by
the other two River-maidens, who appear in the waters as
a funereal escort for their sister. It is as though the river
flows backwards among banks of glimmering mist, and
the companions arrive within two days of leaving the
Black Tarn. However, at Woodmen-town, the way to the
hall is barred by old Fridwald the Runner and several
other warriors of the Woodmen.

Companions who have never seen the Lamp of Balthi
out of its case before must make a Valour roll with a
TN equal to 14 plus the number of Shadow points they
possess. Those who fail the test are partially blinded for
a few hours; those who pass it can either gain one point
of Hope, or remove one point of Shadow, or two points on
a great or extraordinary success (these effects only apply
upon the first occasion of looking at the unfiltered light of
the lamp).

“Hail, Radagast. Hail, heroes. You are welcome here.” He
points a wizened finger at the Maiden. “She is not. Many
have spoken of her treachery at Black Tarn Hall.”
The final challenge is persuading Fridwald to let the
River-maiden enter the Hall of the Lamp. The company
and Radagast could force their way past, but that would
be an unforgivable breach of the trust between the
Wizard and the folk of the Wood. Telling Fridwald that
the Maiden was bewitched by agents of the Enemy is
also not enough – does that wash away all her crimes?
The nature of the company’s previous dealings with the
Woodmen of Woodmen-town is critical to the success of
their task here.

Any hero who participated in The Beast of the Forest (see
page 31) recognise the lamp as the twin of the ruined
one found in the Werewolf’s lair. If there are any Elves
of Mirkwood present when the lamp is exposed, they
recognise the crystal within as Elvish work. If this is

57

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

reported to the Thranduil, it precipitates the events of The
Anger of the Elvenking early (see page 71).

Even if Black Tarn Hall survived, the borders of the
Westerns Eaves of Mirkwood are not yet safe: any
companion who spends the Fellowship phase there may
undertake to Patrol the Wild.

The effects of the light on Duskwater are difficult to
perceive: the River-maiden remains still, but a roll of
Healing catches imperceptible signs of a future recovery
- her breathing seems deeper and more regular, and some
warmth seems to have already returned to her limbs. She
will live.

New Fellowship Phase Undertaking:
Patrol the Wild

Aftermath
If the companions saved the River-maiden form the
curse of the Spider, then that is worth a fine reward – the
Loremaster should consider giving each player at least
five Experience points in addition to the normal rewards
for adventuring and attending game sessions.

The Woodmen of Western Mirkwood always welcome

If the companions failed, or chose not to go on this quest,
then Radagast can only deal with Duskwater in a direct
and personal way. He sails out onto the Black Tarn alone
one night, and shortly after a thunderstorm hits the area.
For five days and nights heavy rains wash over the Black
Tarn, then, the storms cease abruptly. Radagast returns to
Rhosgobel, his face pale and drawn - Duskwater is never
seen again, and a new maiden takes her place in time (see
sidebar). The Brown Wizard is grief-stricken, and vanishes
for several years. He won’t return before 2966.

A

those who would join them as they spend long weeks
patrolling the borders of their settled lands, hunting

down trespassing Orcs and beasts, and generally
"beating the bounds" as the Hobbits put it.
companion

spending

a

Fellowship

phase

in

Woodland Hall, Woodmen-town or Rhosgobel may

choose this undertaking and gain the benefits of
the Mirkwood-lore speciality for the duration of

the following Adventuring phase. If the character
already has Mirkwood-lore , then he may gain two

benefits out of a single Trait invocation (for example,
he could automatically succeed at a roll and gain an
Advancement point).

A New River-maiden
If Duskwater perishes, then a new River-maiden is

Year 2959

siblings grow older and darker – Silverbell leaves the

Events

dwell closer to Woodmen-town, while Sunshadow is

With the lifting of the curse, the Black Tarn begins to heal.
The Marsh-dwellers leave the lake and move north along
the river, digging their strange burrows among the reeds.
They try to lure the Woodmen into traps, and the weird
tolling of marsh-bells echoes from the eastern bank of the
Dusky River.

needed. Over the course of the following year, both her

springs in the northern part of the River and moves to
seen more and more in the Black Tarn itself.

If any of the company have the River-blooded virtue

(Heart of the Wild , page 92), then one of their female
relatives may be called as the new River-maiden. (A

female companion who wishes to retire could also

become the new River-maiden). Otherwise, the new

Enraged by the attack on Tyulqin, the Spiders of Mirkwood
rampage through the woods. They turn on the Wild Men
of Mirkwood who dwell north of the East Bight (Heart of
the Wild, page 100) and these primitive barbarians flee
before their wrathful masters. Some even trespass into the

River-maiden is a stern guardian of the forest, like a

feral child who ferociously defends the river, and her
name is Ice-spear.

58

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

along the river banks on their horses. In years past, the
Leofrings were sometimes friends of the Woodmen of
Rhosgobel, but they never dared to defy their fear of
Mirkwood and visit Woodmen-town.

Woodland Realm, while others take up residence in the
Long Marshes.
The Messenger of Mordor returns from his journey to
Barad-Dûr, bearing new orders from the Dark Lord. The
three Nazgûl of Mirkwood gather in council in Dol Guldur.
Those allied with the Shadow are also summoned to the
Hill of Sorcery; any character with a permanent Shadow
point or a Shadow rating of 3 or more feels strangely drawn
to Dol Guldur. If Mogdred is an enemy of the Woodmen,
then he goes to Dol Guldur. If Ceawin is in the thrall of
the Wood-wights, then he falls into a dreamless sleep for
several days during the gathering.

In the year 2940, a year before the death of Smaug, Orcs
and Men from Dol Guldur attacked Dwarrowhall, a
Leofring encampment, and killed many and took many
horses. The other Leofrings fled south and crossed the
river Anduin, settling in the Field of Celebrant. (See also
Heart of the Wild, page 48)

The Strangers from the East
Three strangers arrive from the East, and somehow cross
the company’s path. Perhaps they meet in a village of the
Woodmen, or maybe they blunder into the company in
the deep forest, or come to a companion’s home seeking
shelter. They are a curious trio indeed.

At the gathering, the Nazgûl discuss their new commands.
Before the death of Smaug the Dragon, Sauron intended to
attack the North first, to cut off the realms of the Elves from
the descendants of Númenor in the South. But now the
North has changed - the Ringwraiths are to redouble their
efforts to destroy the Free Peoples – first the Woodmen,
then the Elves, then Erebor and Dale.
Secretly, the Messenger of Mordor travels through the
Vales of Anduin to the land of the Viglundings. He
promises the friendship of Mordor to Viglund if he seizes
the crossings of the Anduin. He then travels on north, to
Mount Gundabad.
Men bearing the device of the Tyrant’s Hill attack villages
in the East Nether Vales. Many are slain, and many
houses put to the torch. Mogdred claims that the bandits
were former servants of his, but that he dismissed them
some months ago and they are now free men living in the
eaves of Southern Mirkwood, near Dol Guldur.

Adventuring Phase:
The Horse-Lord’s Daughter
Two are clearly Easterlings, with dark skin and clothing of
a kind not seen in the west, although they have travelling
cloaks and boots that were clearly recently acquired ;
one is a boy of twelve years, and has a kingly air about
him, but his skin is marked by recent welts of whips and
the bite of knives. The other Easterling is the woman
who accompanies the boy, an old crone who is clearly
exhausted by her long journey.

Wilderland has been stricken by plagues and wars that
depopulated much of the region. Lands that once were
fertile and fruitful are today empty and barren, or sparsely
inhabited by tenacious tribes like the Woodmen and the
Beornings. The folk called the Leofrings were nomads and
herders who followed the summer grass along the vales.
They never settled in one place for long, but wandered
59

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The third traveller is a woman of around twenty-five
years. She is dressed in similar clothes to the rest, but her
golden hair marks her as clearly kin to the Northmen.
She is tanned from long years in a hot country. She alone
carries a sword. She introduces herself as Athala, and
tells her tale if the heroes give her and her companions
shelter.

Athala’s Tale
Athala’s parents were folk of the Leofrings. She remembers
coming to Rhosgobel once, when she was very young, and
meeting Radagast. Nineteen years ago, their camp was
attacked by Orcs and Men from the forest. Her parents
were slain, and she was sold into slavery in the East.
There, she was raised and trained as an exotic bodyguard
for a noble family.
In recent years, great change has come to the East.
Servants of He who in the West is called the Dark Lord
Sauron have claimed positions of authority, and many
members of the older aristocracy were forced to flee.
The young man in Athala’s company is Sanjar, a prince
of one of the countries of Rhûn. The other woman is his
governess Nazhin. Athala brought Sanjar to Mirkwood to
save him from torture and assassination.
But Athala had other reasons to return to Wilderland:
she is seeking revenge. Even if many years passed,
she remembers clearly the face of the man who killed
her parents and her sisters. He was a young man then,
younger than she is now. He may still be alive – but if he
is dead, why, someone must have ordered the attack. Her
sword is thirsty…

First, though, she must bring Sanjar and Nazhin to a place
of safety. Then, she will seek out her enemy. She describes
the young man to the companions: the description clearly
matches Mogdred, the lord of the Tyrant’s Hill.

The Crimes of Mogdred
Athala’s claim that Mogdred is responsible for her
suffering is of more importance to the folk of Mirkwood
than she realises. According to Mogdred, he was a slave in
Dol Guldur nineteen years ago, and only rose to command
the Tyrant’s Hill after the Wise drove out the Necromancer.
If Athala is to be believed, then Mogdred was leading Orcraids long before that. Only one who had willingly chosen
to serve the Necromancer could have been of such high
standing.

What is to be Done?
Athala wants to kill Mogdred, with or without the
company’s help. She’s a skilled warrior, but knows
nothing about surviving in the forest of Mirkwood. If she
goes off alone in search of the Tyrant’s Hill, she will likely
end up eaten by Spiders or killed by Mogdred’s men. The
companions can help Athala get to Mogdred and have her
revenge, or they can oppose her resolve.
•

Entering the Tyrant’s Hill: The Tyrant’s Hill is fortified
and well guarded (doubly so if Mogdred is a servant
of Dol Guldur). Sneaking in and coming out alive will
be very difficult.

•

Confronting Mogdred: If the companions ask
Mogdred for his side of the story, he laughs. He then
either denies everything (“I was a slave nineteen years

"There Was Something Else At Work…"
The Loremaster should be warned that as the text of this guide goes, the following year’s Adventuring phase works
best if Mogdred is alive, seemingly allied with the Woodmen, but secretly in the service of Dol Guldur. If the actions

of the companions steer the campaign in a different direction (they let Athala kill Mogdred right away, for example)
a level of reworking will be required. The Loremaster should keep in mind that while it is never a good policy to
arrange events in spite of a company’s actions, things do not always develop in the way they seem destined to be.

For example, if Athala discredits Mogdred in the eyes of some of the Woodmen, other Houses may still support him.
Maybe Athala mortally wounds the lord of the Tyrant’s Hill but Mogdred is painfully healed by the Ringwraiths
of Dol Guldur, using black arts that turn him in something more than just a black traitor…

60

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

The Forest Dragon (Heart of the Wild, page 71) leaves
her lair and startes hunting along the eaves of Northern
Mirkwood. Travel along the forest’s edge and the Elf-path
becomes more hazardous.

ago, just as she was. She hates the wrong man”), or
claims that he was forced to lead the attack (“It was a
lifetime ago. The man I was is dead”).
•

•

Accusing Mogdred: The companions could wait until
the Woodmen are assembled, then accuse Mogdred
in public of lying (an opportunity will arise in 2960, at
Ingomer’s funeral).

The Messenger of Mordor commands the Orcs of Mount
Gundabad to aid the Viglundings in their war against
Beorn. The Orcs obey, and Goblins innumerable leave
their dens to harry the Beornings. Some go south to attack
Mountain Hall.

Convincing Athala to wait: If the characters help her
find a place of safety for Sanjar, she is willing to forego
revenge for a year or two.

Adventuring Phase:
The Death of Ingomer

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

In this year, Ingomer Axebreaker of Woodland Hall dies
suddenly. The veteran warrior does not die in battle, but
neither does he die in bed like a weak old man – he falls
dead at a feast, tumbling from his chair and spilling his
horn of wine.

In years past, the Leofrings were allies of the Woodmen. If
the horse-nomads returned to Wilderland, then they might
again be friends of the Free Peoples. The journey south to
the the Field of Celebrant is not especially hazardous if a
traveller takes a boat down the Great River, and avoids the
reach of Dol Guldur. There, the companions can meet with
the Leofrings and befriend them. If the companions speak
of the alliance of the Free Peoples, then the Leofrings may
even choose to migrate north once more. Alternatively,
the characters may choose to establish trade links with
the Leofrings (possibly as a holding), or even open the
Field of Celebrant as a sanctuary.

Ingomer’s death comes at a bad time for the folk of the
wood. The growing Shadow in the south, the siege of Black
Tarn Hall and now rumours of conflict in the north are all
worrisome. In times past, Ingomer was always called to
be the war-leader of the Men of Mirkwood and a rallying
banner for the four Houses; all the folk from the Misty
Mountains to the Wizard’s Hedge trusted and honoured
him. Many folk of the Wood gather at his funeral to
discuss the coming days.

Year 2960

The Funeral

Events

If Mogdred is an ally of the Woodmen, then he attends the
funeral as a matter of course. However, if he is an enemy,
then the Woodmen must decide whether or not to permit
him to attend. He was Ingomer’s son (see The Folk-moot at
Rhosgobel, page 13) and so it would be very rude not to
allow him pay his respects to his sire. The elders among
the Woodmen are divided on the matter, and discuss it at
length, but in the end they decide to let him in. If the players
argue forcefully against this, the elders may reconsider, but
this insult will damage the companions’ reputation among
the Woodmen - a son’s filial duty is held sacred.

The conflict between the Viglundings and the Beornings
flares up again. The Viglundings attack several homesteads
of the followers of Beorn, and take many slaves. There are
no big battles, but many small skirmishes.
Beorn grudgingly dispatches a messenger to Thranduil,
telling him of the war he is fighting. Thranduil orders a
group of Elven warriors to travel to the western edge of
Northern Mirkwood and lend what aid they can to the
Beornings. Some in the court whisper that the affairs of
Men are of no concern to the Woodland Realm, and that
Thranduil is acting unwisely.

The funeral rites are held at Woodland Hall, and last four
days. The body of Ingomer is set upon a bier inside the
61

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Great Hall of Wuduseld. Many songs are sung of Ingomer’s
prowess and glorious battles. Many speak of how Ingomer
was elected war-leader in a time of need, and how dark
days are again at hand. Many voices speak of how a new
war-leader must be chosen, to bring the Houses together.

Running the Election
To see who will be chosen as the new war-leader of the
Woodmen, first the starting support of the candidates
must be determined, in the form of a numerical rating.
•

A successful Riddle test lets a companion realise that this
swell of demand for a new war-leader is no coincidence.
Someone has deliberately seeded rumours to raise the
question. While many do agree with the need for a new
war-leader, not all of the voices are honest ones.

The Arrival of Mogdred
Mogdred enters the hall of Wuduseld dressed less like a
Man of Mirkwood and more like a prince from the South.
He wears a coat of gilded mail, and on his brow shines
a gemstone set upon a circlet. His men, too, are richly
dressed and are led by the warrior-maiden Dagmar (if she
is still alive).
Mogdred brings gifts of gold to those who mourn his
father’s passing. Thirteen years have passed since the folkmoot at Rhosgobel. At that time Mogdred was a young
chieftain. Now, he is more than forty years old; his beard
is grey, and he looks more like his father than ever. Many
whisper that he looks and sounds more like Ingomer than
Ingomer did in recent years.
To the folk of Woodland Hall, any conflict or mistrust
between the Tyrant’s Hill and the Woodmen of Rhosgobel
is not much more than a distant rumour. Even if Mogdred
was previously an enemy of the Woodmen, the young
warriors of Woodland Hall start to clamour for him to be
elected war-leader. The whispers become shouts, and it is
clear that Mogdred will be chosen unless someone stands
against him.

The Election of the War-Leader
All the Houses of the Woodmen (Mountain Hall, Woodland
Hall, Woodmen-town, Rhosgobel, and possibly Sunstead,
Black Tarn Hall and Tyrant’s Hill, depending on previous
events) have sent representatives to the funeral, and they
have the authority to elect a war-leader. At the end of
the four days of mourning, they gather at the doom-ring
outside the hedge and stockade that protect the village,
and a council is held.
62

Mogdred seems the obvious choice – he is the son
of Ingomer, he has the most supporters, his tower is
well-fortified and is a bulwark against Dol Guldur. He
has a starting support of 12 if the Tyrant’s Hill is allied
with the Woodmen, and between 8 and 6 if he is an
enemy, based on the current state of the campaign
being played. Discrediting Mogdred with Athala’s
testimony (see The Horse-Lord’s Daughter) reduces
his support by 3 points.

The only other candidates with any real hope are:
•

Ceawin the Generous. If Sunstead is part of the
Woodmen Houses his starting support is 9, or 7 if he
is in the thrall of the Wood-wights.

•

Munderic the Ponderous, a fat warrior from
Woodmen-town. He is Fridwald the Runner’s nephew,
and he is friend with many warriors of the Woodmen,
but he is more of a front-line fighter and a drinking
buddy than a leader. His starting support is 6.

•

If a Woodman companion wishes to run for the
position, then his starting support is based on his
Standing rating, modified by adding his Valour score.

Companions may then throw their support behind one
candidate or another, entering the doom-ring to make a
speech praising their chosen leader, possibly making an
Awe or Inspire roll). On a successful roll, add 1 to the
chosen leader’s support, 2 on a great success and 3 on an
extraordinary success; if the speaker is a Woodman, then
add that Woodman’s Standing rating instead.
Once all speeches have been made, roll a Success die
for each candidate and add the result to their support.
The candidate with the highest total is deemed the new
war-leader of the Woodmen. (Ties are resolved by rolling
again, unless both candidates agree to act as joint
leaders).

The Return of the Shadow:
2951-2960

The Decisions of the War-Leader
The actions of the Woodmen in the years to come are
partially determined by their choice of a war-leader:

confused mind he is fighting a war not against Dol Guldur,
but against the plague and the foes that destroyed the
confederation of the Northmen many centuries ago.

Mogdred

Munderic

This is the worst possible choice – if he is not already in
the service of Dol Guldur, then Mogdred’s ascension to a
place of power in the Woodmen draws the attention of the
Ghost of the Forest. The Nazgûl approach Mogdred and
tempt him to use his authority to weaken the Woodmen.
In the years to come, Mogdred will order warriors into
fruitless quests and hopeless battles, and push the best of
the next generation of Woodmen to become followers of
darkness.

Munderic is a poor but not disastrous war-leader. He
alternates between ignoring problems for too long, and
then charging wildly into battle without a clear plan. Still,
if the heroes and other wiser heads can exert influence on
him (his uncle Fridwald, for example) he can be guided to
a measure of success.

A Companion
This is the best result, if the character has the wisdom and
valour to see it through. See also the Fellowship phase:
Year’s End entry below.

Ceawin
If the companions saved Ceawin from the Wood-wights,
then Ceawin makes a fine leader. He is understandably
focused on protecting the East Bight, but that means the
Woodmen form a bulwark against the Shadow in the
south. However, if Ceawin is in the thrall of the Woodwights, then his election as war-leader proves disastrous.
His black rages and frequent bouts of madness become
more acute, and his words seem to indicate that in his

Receive Title (War-leader)
As war-leader, a companion is required to command the
Woodmen in battle and has the respect of the Elders of
the Houses of the Woodmen. He is not a king, but he is a
general and a champion in times of strife. The title of warleader can be revoked by a council of Elders at any time,
should the companion prove to be unworthy of the charge,
as in the case of a humiliating defeat on the field of battle.
•

The Standing rating of the adventurer is increased
by 2 and his Standard of Living is now considered to
be Prosperous. Both modifications last as long as the

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
If a companion has been chosen to be the war-leader of the
Woodmen, then he must spend the Year’s End Fellowship
phase in Woodmen-town and choose the Receive Title
(War-leader) undertaking (see box below).

as a gift (Vorondil wore its mate on a baldric, and the
horn is today an heirloom of his family, the House of the
Stewards of Gondor).
The Great War-horn of the Hunter may be blown once
during a combat encounter by a companion in Open
stance, in place of the Rally Comrades combat task. The
companion foregoes his chance to make an attack but does
not need to make a skill roll: all fighting companions
recover a number of Endurance points equal to the
rallying character’s Heart rating plus his Valour rating.

hero holds the title of war-leader.

Additionally, the companion becomes the bearer of the
Great War-horn of the Hunter , a treasure of the Woodmen
Houses of Mirkwood. Fashioned of old from the horn of
one of the great kine of Araw by a Gondorian hero by the
name of Vorondil, it was given to a prince of Rhovanion

63

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

warriors with burning brands dismay it and drive it back.
Still, the monster lurks in the woods nearby for the rest of
the year, and kills again at least three times.

The Gathering
Gloom:

2961-2966

At this time, the fortress of Dol Guldur is rebuilt. The
Werewolf of Mirkwood attacks the settlements of the
Woodmen. The feud between the Beornings and the
Viglundings reach a bloody conclusion.
The forest turns darker as Elves and Men see their dealings
become tense.

Year 2961
Events
Since the year 2954, Orcs and evil Men have laboured to
rebuild the dread fortress of Dol Guldur. This year, their
task approaches completion. While not all the defences
of the Hill of Sorcery can be restored without the aid of
Sauron, the fortress is now fully manned again.
The Werewolf of Mirkwood is seen crossing the Dusky
River. It attacks homesteads near Woodland Hall, until

64

A council of Woodmen Elders gather in Woodmen-town
to discuss the recent events in the forest. Some argue
that they should join the Beornings in their fight with the
Viglundings, saying that if they help Beorn now, he will
help them in return.
A wet spring and a warm summer augur for a good
harvest in Wilderland this year. While the Woodmen do
not sow much, their allies in the East Bight and Dale do
rely heavily on farmed crops.
The Beornings defeat the Viglundings in a battle near the
Forest Gate, aided by Elves from the Woodland Realm.
Broken, some Viglundings retreat into Mirkwood while
the rest flee north. Beorn and his men pursue, but their
chase is interrupted by a counter-attack from a host of
Goblins and Trolls who lurked in the shadow of the trees.
The Messenger of Mordor rides around the northern edge
of Mirkwood, passing through the Narrows of the Grey
Mountains and calling up Orcs, Trolls and other monsters.
He then rides south, stealing past Dale like a shadow, and
meets with his spies and agents outside Lake-town.

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

Adventuring Phase:
Paying the Troll

lost Greydelve (Heart of the Wild, page 23), a stronghold
that was built by his forefathers long ago in the Grey
Mountains, and now overrun with filthy creatures. Why,
he even suspects that these particular Trolls dwelt in its
halls! He is proud to have the chance to kill them. If the
companions met Frár before, they find the years have
mellowed him somewhat; his beard too has regrown,
and he seems less bitter and angry, as if his long exile has
finally taught him a little patience.

If the companions are familiar with the exiled Dwarf Frár
the Beardless (Heart of the Wild, page 22) then he seeks
them out to aid him. Otherwise, they can meet Frár if they
travel across the Grey Mountain Narrows, or even along
the Elf-path in Northern Mirkwood: the Dwarf is heading
towards the Woodland Realm to ask the Elves for help, but
he would much rather deal with a company of adventurers
than go begging at Thranduil’s door.

Frár’s current hideout is located in a rocky hill covered
with dark pines. While a perceptive companion can spot
footprints in the mud, broken twigs and other signs
of habitation, the stones he has placed to cover the
entrance to a natural cave are positioned so cleverly that
the opening is invisible to anyone except a Dwarf. Frár
approaches the entrance to the cave, then stops dead.
“Someone is here,” he whispers. “Wait a moment.” He
slips into the darkness, then comes back a moment later.
“Forgive the alarm! It is my kinsman Flor. Come in, and
be welcome.”

Frár tells the company of a band of ferocious Hill-trolls
that recently took up residence in Northern Mirkwood.
They were part of a Goblin army that came south out of
the Grey Mountains, but split off after the battle with the
Beornings and are now camped near the Elf-path, waiting
to ambush travellers. Frár begs the company for aid in
dealing with these Trolls. He knows roughly where they
are, and offers to guide the heroes there, once they have
stopped briefly by his refuge in the forest.

The Refuge

The Dwarf leads the company through Mirkwood.
For a Dwarf, he is remarkably woodcrafty, and moves
through the underbrush almost as silently as a Hobbit.
He is taciturn for most of the journey, but as they draw
closer to his refuge, he starts talking heatedly about the

Frár’s current refuge is bare and grim. He normally resides
in a hidden house along the northern edge of Mirkwood,
in sight of the Grey Mountains Narrows, but his constant
wanderings require him to make use of several less

65

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

comfortable lodgings. A corner of the cave is occupied by
some improvised pantry shelves storing a little dried fruit
and biscuits, while the hard stone floor is made somewhat
more comfortable by a thick layer of straw; there is no fire,
just a cunning portable Dwarven stove that gives little
heat and no smoke, for smoke would reveal the location
of the refuge.
A second Dwarf, Flor, sits by the stove, digging out fleas
from his beard and roasting them on the hot griddle. He
grins as the companions enter, and hops up and bows.
“Flor, at your service.” He then beckons Frár aside, and the
two have a brief conversation in a hushed voice. It would
be the height of rudeness for a guest to eavesdrop. If a
character does so, then he gains a point of Shadow, but
hears Flor question Frár about where the company came
from: Flor thought Frár was going to fetch Elvish warriors,
not adventurers! Frár explains that the companions are
renowned heroes and experienced Troll-killers, and,
besides, they were closer than the Woodland Realm.
Flor tells the company that he has been tracking the Trolls;
they are camped half a day’s march from their refuge. He
will lead the company there in the morning.
If questioned, Flor tells the company that there are three
Trolls, but they are common Stone-trolls – dangerous, but
nothing an experienced band of heroes cannot handle.

66

As everyone knows, Stone-trolls turn to stone in the direct
light of the sun, but unfortunately the thick foliage of
Mirkwood provides almost as much shelter as a mountain
cave, allowing the Trolls to avoid sunlight. If a companion
requires and succeeds in an Insight roll, he feels uneasy
about Flor’s words, but the Dwarf is an accomplished liar
and it is impossible to tell for sure if he is being truthful or
deceitful.

Flor’s Secret
Like Frár, Flor dreams of returning to the Greydelve.
Unlike his kinsman though, he is prepared to bargain with
the Enemy to do so. Flor met the Messenger of Mordor last
year, and promised to serve Dol Guldur. In exchange, the
Nazgûl promised Flor that the Orcs would one day hand
over control of the Greydelve, when the destruction of the
Woodland Realm will make all of Mirkwood the domain
of the Enemy.
Faithful to his dark pact, Flor is about to lead the company
into a trap…

The Troll Ambush
The next day, Flor and Frár leave their refuge along with
the company, and lead the adventurers through the woods
to the encampment of the Trolls. Their journey passes
through a thicket of black yew trees of great height; an Elf
recognises this particular stand as Cuimenan, the Garden

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

of the Crafted (or Piercing) Arches, a stand of trees planted
to grow wood for the Elven bows of war. In the gloom of
Mirkwood up ahead, the companions spot three Stonetrolls sitting around a campfire. The carcass of some
animal – possibly a boar, maybe a Man – roasts on a spit.
The Trolls pull at their skin, scraping off flakes of stone.

Weighted Nets
Three of the Stone-trolls carry weighted nets, and
may throw them onto a victim to trap them. The Troll

must make an attack roll using his Movement rating.

If the roll succeeds, then the companions is treated as
though the victim of a Seize Victim attack (see page

Unfortunately for the heroes, more Trolls lurk in the
nearby woods, waiting to ambush the company.

68 of the Loremaster’s Guide). Unlike a normal

Seize Victim attack, though, the Troll can still use

its main attack to beat the entangled victim into a

•

If the companions charge into battle, the other Stonetrolls burst out of cover and attack with the advantage
of surprise.

•

If the companions try scouting the area first, then a
successful Hunting roll spots the Trolls lurking in the
trees, while an Awareness test notices that there are
seven big stones in a ring around the campfire, but
there are only three Trolls sitting there on one stone
each. Those stones are seats – there must be four
more nearby!

Unsurmountable Odds

If the companions try sneaking up, then Fror shouts
“They’re here! They’re here!” to alert the Trolls.

Flee!
To leave the battle, each character needs to successfully
employ the Escape Combat special task (Adventurer’s
Guide, page 163), against a TN of 17. However, fleeing is not
enough – the Stone-trolls pursue the company through the
forest. The characters can either try outrunning the Trolls
with Athletics, outlasting them with Travel or hiding
from them with Stealth. The companions’ attempts can
be resolved as opposed actions (Loremaster’s Guide, page
21), all rolled against the Stone-troll chief’s Perception
rating of 2. Frár recommends returning to his house, as
the Stone-trolls will never find the entrance.

•

bloody pulp.

The companions face six Stone-trolls (page 81 of the
Loremaster’s Guide) and one Stone-troll chief (use the
statistics for a Stone-troll, with Endurance 80, Parry 6 and
favoured Armour) – those are never good odds. Fleeing is
an excellent plan, although hardened warriors may prefer
to fight.

Unexpected Guests
When the ambush is sprung, three tough-looking Stonetrolls stride out of the trees wielding clubs – followed
by something that looks like another Stone-troll, but a
lot bigger than the others, a hulking monster dressed in
black chain mail! This Stone-troll chief was king in the
wild wastes beyond the Grey Mountains, until the call
of the Shadow drew him south. The other Trolls just call
him Basher. He snarls a challenge to the companions in
mangled version of the Common Speech. Meanwhile, the
three Trolls by the fire grab clubs and weighted nets and
approach.

Fight!
Seven trolls would be a challenge even for a hero of old.
The Stone-trolls are much more frightened of their chief
Basher than they are of the companions, so they will fight
to the death as long as Basher is alive. If Basher is slain,
then all the Stone-trolls become Craven and flee if reduced
to zero Hate points.

Frár is appalled by his kinsman’s treachery. Flor screams
that “He promised that they would give us back the
Greydelve if we killed enough Elves! You were supposed
to bring me Elves!” Frár draws his axe, and starts to run
after his kinsman - both disappear into the forest (Frár
eventually cannot bring himself to slay Flor - the heroes
may not have any such compunction if they ever lay their
hands on him!).

Captured!
Companions captured by the Trolls are not killed – at
least, not right away. Basher questions them first - “no
67

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Elf-tricks”, he roars – demanding that they tell him all
they know about the Woodland Realm and the Elves who
guard the Forest Gate at the western end of the path.
He is clearly planning to make the road impassable,
preventing anyone from crossing Mirkwood safely. Once
a prisoner can no longer provide useful information, he
is handed over to the Stone-trolls to be prepared for the
cooking spit.

promising the return of the Greydelve in exchange for his
betrayal. Flor is nowhere to be found; he fled screaming
madly into the depths of Mirkwood.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

Surviving the Encounter
The situation is indeed complicated. First, these Trolls are
not easy to fool; while clever roleplaying might lead them
to bicker amongst themselves (with very good Persuade
rolls, for example), imprisoned companions cannot
simply keep them talking long enough for the sun to rise,
as its rays will not penetrate the forest canopy. Fleeing
characters could turn the tables on the Trolls, and guide
the monsters into an ambush or a trap at the Forest Gate.
(The pit trap encountered in The Questing Beasts is not too
far from the Troll camp, for example).
Some hope remains with Frár the Beardless. Ashamed for
his kinsman’s betrayal, he will return to the scene of the
ambush and attempt to save the companions if he can. He
brings reinforcements, the mad brothers Polin and Pomin
(page 19), if they are still alive, and possibly other Dwarf
exiles from the Greydelve. In any case, the force he is able
to gather is not enough to defeat the Stone-trolls, but only
to distract them long enough for the companions to find a
way to save themselves.
If everything ends well, Frár apologises for Flor’s actions.
Some dark power must have reached to his kinsman,

The Stone-trolls on the Elf-path may become a problem
that requires several adventures to be dealt with. The
companions should consider paying a visit to the
Woodland Realm, to warn the Elvenking of the grievous
matter.

Year 2962
Events
King Thranduil sends a delegation of Wood Elves to
Woodmen-town. If a new war-leader was elected in 2960,
then the Elves pay homage to that leader with gems worth
50 points of Treasure. A small number of Men are travelling
with the Elven delegation, to ease any discussion and
negotiation; among them is Halbrech the Wineseller (see
The Appendix, page 130) and his twelve year-old daughter
Hanna.
The Werewolf of Mirkwood continues to attack the
settlements in the Western Eaves. This time, it is seen in
the proximity of Rhosgobel. If Radagast is present, he
drives it away; if the Wizard is absent, then the wolf leaps
the hedge protecting Rhosgobel and spreads terror and
death before it flees.

Treasure of the Trolls
If Basher and the Stone-trolls are slain, companions looking for their lair find a cave nearby which the monsters used
as their larder – and their treasury. 200 points of Treasure are there for the taking, the bulk of it in Dwarf-gold

stolen from the Greydelve. Some of the treasure, though, was clearly taken from recent victims, so there are a few
Beorning combs and arm-rings thrown on top of the Dwarf-forged gilded helms and necklaces.

Frár and the other exiled Dwarves claim all the treasure to come from the Greydelve. If the companions take all the

treasure for themselves they earn the enmity of Frár and his kin, even though Frár owes them a debt of honour after
his kinsman’s betrayal. If the companions speak to Frár, they may come to an arrangement.

68

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

The Beornings attack the homestead of Viglund. They fight
a great battle, and six of Viglund’s sons are slain. Viglund
himself flees the burning house and escapes west towards
the Misty Mountains, never to be seen again. In a secret
chamber under the house, the victors find the bodies of
three strange Men wearing robes of foreign design. Among
their devices, the bodies bear the sign of the Lidless Eye.

The Outlaw Camp
Geirbald’s camp is more like a small town. While once
Geirbald and his twelve wandered Mirkwood on wild
adventure, now the outlaws are mostly settled. The camp
is located in Western Mirkwood, approximately fifty miles
north of Woodland Hall, and is surrounded by a stockade
and several pens for grunting black pigs.

Future in the Past

Adventuring Phase:
Honour Among Thieves
For many years, the outlaw band under Geirbald Kinslayer
has existed on the fringes of Woodman society. Geirbald
and his ragtag group of outcasts and misfits roamed
Mirkwood, hunting and fighting Orcs and Spiders.
The company of Geirbald was a place where dishonoured
or wayward warriors could find a home, where a man
could cast away his old misdeeds and begin again (see
Heart of the Wild, page 83).
Geirbald’s original band of thirteen has swelled to nearly
fifty warriors and twice as many followers. Now, Geirbald
is very old and tired and desires to return to Woodland
Hall. He contacts the companions and asks them to come
see him in his camp in Western Mirkwood, so that he may
speak with them.

69

In the camp, any companion who played through The
Helm of Peace may recognise Valdis (or her sister Valya,
if Valdis is dead) watching children at play. One of the
children is hers, born of her union with her former lover
Beldir (page 25). His name is Girion, and he is eleven
years old.
Standing nearby is a slim young Woodman warrior who
must have fairy blood in his ancestry, such is his grace
and speed. This is Elfsigil, her new lover, who is accounted
the best swordsman and archer among the outlaws. He
smiles like a viper as the companions pass by. Valdis’
raven Eágbitar still perches on her shoulder, cawing in the
tongues of Men and Elves. It mockingly mimics the voices
of the companions.

The Story of Geirbald
The companions are led towards a ramshackle longhouse
where Geirbald waits for them. He has grown too weak

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

recently to even leave his bed. Inside, Geirbald lies on a
sleeping cot covered with furs. His skin is like thin paper;
his eyes are bleary and white with cataracts. He beckons
the company closer and tells his tale.
Many years ago (Heart of the Wild, page 83), Geirbald
accidentally slew his sister with an arrow while hunting
the Werewolf of Mirkwood. The Woodmen called him
kinslayer, and Geirbald left his home for exile. There, he
hunted the Werewolf for many years, but alas, he never
caught the beast. He is too old now to continue the
quest. He wants to go home to Woodland Hall one last
time before he dies. Will the characters go to the Elders
of Woodland Hall and beg them to allow Geirbald’s
return?

At Woodland Hall
If they heed the request of the dying Geirbald, the
companions meet with the council of Elders in Woodland
Hall. Under the roof of Wuduseld they are permitted to
speak in the outlaw’s defence (the Loremaster should
stage the meeting as a full-fledged encounter). The Elders
are divided on the matter – some argue that Geirbald has
punished himself enough with thirty years of exile, and
that he should be allowed to die in the shadow of the hall.
Others say that kinslaying, even unwitting kinslaying, is
unforgivable.
When the encounter appears to be progressing and the
council seems approaching a resolution, a final obstacle
emerges: one Elder named Atarmud refuses to make a
decision without further thought. He seems sympathetic,
but refuses to vote in favour of allowing Geirbald to
return. A roll of Riddle during interaction reveals the
reason for his hesitancy – Atarmud was once betrothed
to Geirbald’s sister Geina, and loved both her and her
brother deeply. Atarmud decides that he must consider
the matter more deeply, and says that he will give his
answer tomorrow.
That evening, a band of some thirty warriors emerges
from the forest near Woodland Hall. Geirbald took a
turn for the worse after the companions departed, and is
clearly dying. The outlaws, led by Elfsigil, decided to carry
him straight to Woodland Hall. They encamp outside the
gates, waiting for permission to enter.
70

Atarmud & the Ghost
In the black of night, Atarmud leaves Woodland Hall to
go into the forest and visit his sister’s burial mound (the
companions have a chance to notice him if they keep a
watch). As he kneels there, he hears a whispered voice,
telling him that his sister does not rest easily, and that
Geirbald is still a murderer and a kinslayer who failed
to atone for his sin when he abandoned the hunt for the
Werewolf of Mirkwood. Amazed, Atarmud returns to
Woodland Hall and tells of this prodigious event. Steeled by
this ghostly visitation, Atarmud declares that he will vote
against Geirbald’s plea when the council meets tomorrow.
If the companions followed Atarmud, a successful
Hunting test lets them spot a big black bird flapping
away from a tree close to the burial mound. The bird is
Eágbitar, the raven ally of Valdis.
Tensions grow overnight between the followers of
Geirbald and the warriors of Woodland Hall. The outlaws’
beloved leader is dying, and his last request is a simple
one. Everyone knows that Geirbald has fought for thirty
years to make amend for his mistake – to refuse him now
would be a horrible insult, and would forever destroy the
uncertain bonds between the Woodmen and the outlaws.
Convincing Atarmud that he was tricked is difficult, he
is a proud, old man. But the companions may certainly
devise a way. Here follow a couple of suggestions:
•

If the company could somehow capture Eágbitar
without killing it, they could demonstrate how
Atarmud was tricked by the talking bird. If they
attempt to confront Valdis herself, however, she slips
away into the woods – she has a greater part still to
play.

•

If the companions take a solemn oath to take on the
quest to kill the Werewolf of Mirkwood, that could
fulfil the demands of honour. Atarmud wants to let
Geirbald die in the hall, but the ’ghost’ reminded him
of the oath of vengeance.

In the absence of better options, the company could sneak
Geirbald into Woodland Hall under cover of darkness, so
he can die in peace.

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

Year 2963

Geirbald’s Dying Wish
If Geirbald dies in Woodland Hall, he whispers his last
words to those around him, including the heroes.

Events

“The beast has taken everything from me. Three times I
fought it, and three times I was defeated – but a foresight
is on me now! The beast will die… in a place where there
are no shadows… in a time when there is no hope… and
its death… will be the doom of the Forest. It must be slain!
It must die… all things must pass from this world.”

In this year, curious weeds grow in many places throughout
Mirkwood. These thorny wild plants look black in the
darkness of the trees, but have an eerie purplish shade
when viewed under direct sunlight. The black pigs of the
Woodmen find that the weeds are very tasty, but the plant
is poisonous to both men and beasts and many pigs die
after eating them. The weeds also crowd into farmland,
choking fruit and crops.

Pleased that Geirbald died peacefully, the outlaws return
to their camp. A new leader is chosen from among their
number – one of Geirbald’s oldest followers, a grizzled,
one-eyed hunter named Beral.

After appearing at the last battle against the Viglundings
in the form of a huge bear, Beorn leaves his hall and travels
towards the Misty Mountains on a mysterious errand. A
few among his followers say that after the Battle of Five
Armies Beorn made a similar journey and that when he
returned he welcomed Men to settle under his protection
for the first time. Some of the Beornings worry that Beorn
will change his mind upon his return, and will send them
away.

Vengeance of the Outlaws
If Geirbald dies outside Woodland Hall, then he does not
pass gently. His last hours are marked with fevered dreams
and moans of agony. His followers are infuriated by the
sight of their leader dying within sight of his home, but
denied the grace of passing inside Wuduseld. When the
council of Elders finally make their decision, the outlaws
are so angry that they draw swords, and Woodman spills
Woodman blood outside the gates of the town. Three
warriors from Woodland Hall die, and two of the outlaws
perish. The rest flee into the forest.

Adventuring Phase:
The Anger of the Elvenking

Elfsigil becomes leader of the outlaws, with Valdis as the
clear power behind him. The outlaws become enemies of
the Woodmen, and in years to come there are many raids
and skirmishes between the two peoples.

The delegation sent by the Elvenking to Woodmen-town
returns to the Woodland Realm, bringing strange tidings
to Thranduil. They speak of a great glowing lamp that
hangs from the roof of the longhouse there, and that its
light shines with a radiance they have not seen in an age
of the world. Would it be possible that these Woodmen
found and hid one of the lost lamps that once hung above
the gates of Amon Lanc?

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
A hero who spent time with the outlaws may elect to join
them. Eschewing home and kin, the companion joins the
band of merry outlaws who dwell in Mirkwood and loses
all Standing in his home culture, but may also erase up to
three Shadow points (including permanent Shadow!) as
he leaves his old burdens and worries behind.

Thranduil dismisses the claim. He remembers those lamps
of old, they were made of imperishable crystal, not glass
and wood, like the lamp the envoys are describing. Then
Hanna, the daughter of Halbrech the Wineseller steps
forward and says that she heard old men and women in
Woodmen-town tell stories of how their wondrous lamp
was carried out of Dol Guldur by ’the Grey Wizard’…

As an outlaw, the companion may not gain Cultural
Weapons as Rewards.
71

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The companions may encounter Gandalf anywhere along
the Wizard’s itinerary. If they intend to bring him to the
Elvenking, they must either convince him to accompany
them, or threaten him with the force of arms – Gandalf will
not attack any of the Free Folk, but neither is he particularly
pleased about being diverted from his mission.

This testimony causes an uproar in the hall. If all this
should prove to be true, then the Woodmen could be
accused of stealing one of the treasures of the Silvan
Elves, of deceiving them by hiding it, and, worst of all, of
endangering the Woodland Realm by not letting the lamp
protect its borders. Why, if the Elves had the lamp they
might never have been driven north of the Mountains of
Mirkwood!

If the characters tarry, Gandalf is found by the Silvan Elves
first. The company encounters the Wizard anywhere on
the road from Rhosgobel to Thranduil’s Halls, seemingly
smoking his pipe alone while sitting on a rock or a fallen
tree. Upon approaching Gandalf, the companions will
discover that he is actually being escorted by a group of
armed Elves of Mirkwood, and that their bows are pointed
at the companions as they speak…

If the outrage was not enough, it could seem also that their
“friends” the Wizards knew of this treachery. Mithrandir
brought the lamp out of Dol Guldur, and the Brown
Wizard lives not a day’s march from the hall. They must
have known and conspired to keep the lamp a secret!
Some – especially those aligned with the Wayward
Elves – argue that the Woodland Realm should rise in
arms and march south to reclaim their stolen property.
Thranduil raises his hands for silence. Mithrandir hid
the lamp, and Mithrandir will explain himself. Let the
word go forth – find Gandalf and bring him to the Halls
of the Elvenking!

The Hunt for Gandalf
If the heroes were present in Thranduil’s Halls when the
envoys returned with their news, they may become involved
in the hunt for Gandalf. The Elvenking promises to reward
richly whoever brings news of the Wizard to him.
In 2963, Gandalf crosses over the Misty Mountains
from Rivendell in the company of Aragorn and the sons
of Elrond. The four cross into the land of the Beornings,
hoping to visit Beorn, but find that he is gone. They then
part company, with Gandalf and Aragorn travelling south
to Rhosgobel. Aragorn continues south to enter into the
service of King Thengel of Rohan, while Gandalf visits
Radagast before travelling north along the forest eaves to
the Forest Gate.
Upon leaving Rhosgobel Gandalf moves with haste –
Radagast reported that his spies in Dol Guldur saw several
riders leave the citadel and travel north in recent times.
The Grey Pilgrim suspects the hand of Dol Guldur behind
the actions of Viglund, and is bent to find out something
about it. The longer he waits, the colder the trail becomes.
Therefore, he does not welcome interruption.
72

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

At Thranduil’s Court

“I will not imprison a Wizard, even if he has wronged us –
and his words, though bitter, were not without wisdom. I
need counsel, and time to think.”

The Elvenking might prefer to question Gandalf in private,
but his followers are greatly wroth, so circumstances
force his hand. Gandalf is questioned in the Halls of the
Elvenking as though he was a prisoner.

If the characters wish, they can speak to the court. Some
Elves still want to take the lamp by force, others think they
should demand that the Woodmen return it. Others prefer
to wait, either heeding the words of Gandalf or arguing
that the lamp has been missing for hundreds of years,
so there is no need for a hasty decision. More worrying,
though, are the many voices who argue that if Thranduil
does not recover the lamp, it would be a betrayal of the
Realm.

Thranduil intends to find all that is to be known about
this ‘Lamp of Balthi’. Knowing that this day would come
eventually, the Wizard sighs, and tells the full tale of how
a young Woodman guided him to Dol Guldur, hundreds
of years ago.
When the tale of the discovery is over, Gandalf admits
openly that he gave the lamp to Balthi the Woodman of
his own volition. He recounts also how he consulted with
his cousin Radagast and conspired to conceal the lamp,
but not from the Elves.

Thranduil makes no decision this year. However, he does
send trusted agents to fetch Ormal the Lampmaker and
bring him to Thranduil’s court. The companions might
be charged with the task, especially if they studied with
Ormal before.

He explains:

“I was worried that the Enemy – the real Enemy – would
try to reclaim it if he knew exactly where it was, and how
could his Eye not be fixed perpetually upon the halls of
those who created it?

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Companions spending the Fellowship phase in the
Elvenking’s Halls who didn’t encounter the Lampmaker
before may make his acquaintance and choose the Study
with the Lampmaker undertaking (Heart of the Wild, page
79).

“The lamp is indeed a potent weapon against the Shadow.
But the Woodmen have the greater need in the coming
war. Yes, war. Sauron has declared in Mordor. Soon, soon
as the Elves reckon it, but perhaps even as Men reckon
it, he will loose his gathering forces upon Middle-earth.
Dol Guldur is rebuilt, and evil things dwell there again.
Mirkwood will be a battleground.

Year 2964
Events

“If the Elves reclaim the lamp, then the Woodmen will
doubtless be destroyed. It will make the Woodland Realm
stronger for a while, but in the end it will be an island of
light surrounded by a sea of darkness, and it will founder
and fall at the last.

Escorted by Elven warriors, the Elf Ormal travels to
Woodmen-town to see the Lamp of Balthi. If the companions
knew or befriended the Lampmaker, or if the Elvenking
trusts them, they may be asked to accompany him on
the journey. Ormal is very interested in knowing any
information the companions might have about the lamps.

“But I agree that now the choice belongs to the Elves. I
have urgent errands elsewhere.”

Beorn and Gandalf return together from the far north.
No more Orcs trouble the Beorning lands for some years.
Beorn asks his people for counsel – should they welcome
the surviving Viglunding into their houses or drive them
away from the Vales of Anduin?

The Wizard strides out of the audience and walks to the
magic gates of the Halls, which only open at the wish of
Thranduil. The Elvenking pauses a moment, then lowers
his eyes - the doors swing open.
73

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Adventuring Phase:
The Greydelve

mountains, and came at last to the gates of Moria. There,
we slew Azog and avenged the insult done to Thrór… and I
looked upon the field and wept, for half of those who went
to war lay dead or dying. Some counselled that we should
march on and reclaim the halls of Durin, but to do so… to
attempt that would have doomed us all.
“Now we have the Lonely Mountain again, and have
grown strong and wealthy – but I saw how the strength
of a people can be bled out in a single battle, and thus
be diminished forever. I will give you back your halls, but
I will not endanger my kingdom for honour or kinship
alone.
“Here, then, are my conditions. First, you shall not be King
of the Greydelve. You shall be Lord there, but you and
yours will acknowledge me as your king.
“Second, you shall have such an army as we can gather,
equipped with the best weapons from my armouries, but I
will not take the strength of the Mountain. Long have you
lived among the folk of the Wood – ask them for help. Yea,
even the Elves.
“Third, to aid you, I give you a portion of my treasure
hoard, gold and precious stones won by my cousin Thorin
from the dragon. With this treasure you may hire warriors
and sellswords, and they too shall be equipped from my
armouries – but when the Greydelve is yours again, you
shall labour to repay me.”

After many years, King Dáin finally listens to the petition
of Frár the Beardless and the exiled Dwarves at Yule-tide
in 2963. The kingdom of Erebor has grown strong enough
to consider aiding Frár in retaking their ancestral home,
the Greydelve.

Hearing this, Frár tears at his beard, and grows red, but
he chokes down his anger and bows, for he knows that he
will not get another chance at reclaiming his ancestor’s
halls.

In the Great Chamber of Thrór, the King Under the
Mountain speaks.

Gathering an Army
In the months to follow, Frár visits Dale, Lake-town, the
Halls of the Elvenking, the Beornings and the land of
the Woodmen. In each place, he calls for warriors and
adventurers to join him.

“Long have you waited, Frár son of Fráen, and many times
have you asked for my aid in reclaiming what was yours.
Now, I will answer, but you may not like all that I have to
say.

Those that join the fight will be paid in Dragon-gold and
Dwarf-steel. He successfully hires many mercenaries in
Lake-town, but needs more warriors.

“When I was but a stripling, I marched to war with my
father Náin. We slew many Orcs and Goblins under the
74

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

Even if the companions do not join the quest, then they
can speak for or against Frár’s proposal. Those who go
will be richly rewarded and gain valuable experience in
battle – assuming they return…

Year 2965
Events

Reclaiming the Greydelve

If Ormal the Lampmaker was allowed to enter Woodmentown and see the Lamp of Balthi, he takes residence there
and spends long months studying the wondrous artefact.
While suspicious at first, the Woodmen let him do as he
likes, as the lamp seems to glow brighter since the day
Ormal has started to inspect it.

The campaign to reclaim the Greydelve takes many
months. Most of those who take part in it will not return
until late autumn in 2966. The Dwarf-hold was once a
proud citadel atop an iron mine, but the Orcs took it long
ago. Now Orcs and Trolls live in the darkness below.
•

•

•

If the companions join Frár’s army, then they face
pitched battles in the shadow of the Grey Mountains,
followed by dungeon crawling through the dark mines
as they seek out the last of the Orcs. While Frár is
victorious at first, the bigger danger lies behind him.
Many of the mercenaries believe that the Greydelve
conceals some vast treasure, and once the battle is
won, they plot to murder Frár.

A band of Dwarves travelling along the Elf-path are going
to join Bofri son of Bofur (page 130) in his quest to reclaim
the Old Forest Road; unfortunately, they are waylaid by
Spiders and lose their path. This misfortune turns on its
head when they come upon a stream running down from
the Mountains of Mirkwood whose bed glitters with gold.
Many of the Viglunding warriors and cottars defeated
by the Beornings migrate south. Some settle in the
fertile lands west of the Western Eaves and trade with
the Woodmen; others settle even further south, and pay
tribute to the Tyrant’s Hill.

If the companions are not present, then Frár is
murdered and there is terrible strife among the
victors. The mercenaries are killed by Dáin’s warriors,
but Frár’s kin blame Dáin for failing to protect Frár.
The surviving exiled Dwarves banish everyone else
from the Greydelve and shut the doors.

Adventuring Phase:
The Theft of the Lamp

If the company saves Frár, then the Greydelve is
reclaimed successfully and becomes an ally of Erebor.

Several days before the beginning of Yule-tide, a band of
Wayward Elves arrives in the Western Eaves (optionally,
led by Ruithel - see page 17). They meet with Ormal the
Lampmaker and his retinue, and feast in an oak grove
near Woodmen-town. The coming of so many of the Fair
Folk so close to the Yule-tide festival is seen as a good
omen by the Woodmen. Three of these Elves are especially
notable. All three are young as Elves reckon years, and all
three are fey and wild.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
If the Greydelve is reclaimed, then it can be opened as a
sanctuary. Any Dwarves (or even, grudgingly, Men) who
settle there may be granted a holding (suggested rating
of 6).

•

B
75

The leader of the trio is Duvainiel, a dark-haired
Elf-maiden of some four hundred years. Despite her
youth, she is noted for the strength of her will, and she
has mastered arts that normally take many centuries
to learn – she has mastered all three forms of Woodelf Magic (see the Adventurer’s Guide, page 130) to an
unusual degree.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

•

Her younger brother Oldir is next in age. He is tall for a
Silvan Elf, and unusually strong. Unlike his moonpale
sister, Oldir is tanned and muscular, for he is one of
the Raft-elves who travel down to Lake-town regularly.
It is important that the companions discover Oldir’s
talents as a boatsman before The Festival, below.

•

Third is Tinuhel. At only a hundred years old, she
is one of the youngest Elves in all Mirkwood, for the
Firstborn have few children. She is the wildest of the
three, and the strangest. Her mood changes swiftly,
like wild-born ripples breaking the tranquillity of a
forest pool. She has little time for the ways of mortals,
and considers Men and Orcs to be equally brutish
and stupid.

lamp, takes hold. As they fall asleep, the characters hear
the musical laughter of an Elf-maiden…

If any of the companions are in Woodmen-town around
midsummer, they meet these Elves. Duvainiel studies with
the Lampmaker, while the other two make mischief in
Woodmen-town.

The Festival
The Woodmen of Mirkwood hold a feast at Midsummer
every year. They light torches and hang them from the
boughs of the trees, trying to drive away the gloom for one
day. It is a festival of light and hope, and reaffirms their
belief that one day the Shadow will be lifted and the wood
will again become green. It is a day for weddings and
betrothals, for song and dance, for celebration and trade.
Many come from the other Houses to visit Woodmentown this day.

When they awake, the Lamp of Balthi is gone. When
Duvainiel’s magic put the feasters to sleep, the three
Wayward Elves entered the Great Hall and carried it away.

Chasing the Thieves

That night, the Elders of the Houses gather in the Great
Hall. There, tales are told, songs sung and matters of
import both small and large are discussed over many
horns of drink. The Beornings gifted the feast with bread
and mead, and the delegation of the Elvenking that visited
Woodmen-town three years ago left behind some barrels
of good wine, so there is much rejoicing.

The disappearance of the Lamp of Balthi is a terrible
blow for Woodmen-town. When despair finally gives
way to suspicion and anger, the Woodmen immediately
blame the Elves. If the war-leader of the Woodmen is
present, then the Woodmen look to him for leadership
in this dark hour. If there is no war-leader at the feast,
then various Woodmen warriors of renown start taking
action, helped by their respective followers. Some
march straight for the camp of the Lampmaker and take
him and his guards hostage. Others spread out into
the forest, looking for signs of the Elves. Most hunters
assume that the thieves fled north, back towards the
Woodland Realm. If there are any Elves of Mirkwood

Then, at the height of the feast, the Lamp of Balthi
flares with a sudden light. Every eye is drawn to the
blazing lamp. A moment later, the light of the lamp is
suddenly snuffed out, plunging the hall into darkness –
and everyone in the hall into an unnatural slumber, as
Duvainiel’s Elf-magic, augmented by the power of the
76

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

large rock a few yards from the tree: Oldir wields a spear
to keep the wolves at bay, while his sister’s bow sings.
Already two Wargs lie dead, but many more circle them.

in the company, then they may be detained or even
attacked by infuriated Woodmen.
A successful Search roll leads to the docks, where
one of the boats that was tied up there is missing. If
the companions can divine where they were headed
(foresight, a friendly raven, or another clever use of a
Virtue) they find that the Elves are going south along the
Dusky River.

Young Tinuhel has retreated into a cave-like gap between
the roots of the Skybridge oak, carrying a heavy leather
sack. The Lamp of Balthi must be within. The Elf intended
to hang the Lamp from the tall tree, but she was surprised
by the ambush before she could climb it.

Chasing the Elves south in haste can be resolved as a
prolonged action with a high difficulty. The fugitive Elves
have a distinct advantage over the company and planned
their misdeed carefully.

In front of the gap where Tinuhel is trapped is one gigantic
wolf-creature, whose eyes gleam with unholy fire. It is the
Werewolf of Mirkwood.
When the companions arrive, the Werewolf turns to attack
them, while the other wolves concentrate on keeping the
Elves trapped where they are. If the Werewolf is wounded or
reduced to 0 Endurance, it lets its current body perish and
possesses another one of the wolves nearby (see page 83
of the Loremaster’s Guide and Heart of the Wild, page 86).

Eventually (probably the next morning) the companions
find the stolen boat caught in weeds in the middle of the
river. As they approach, one of the River-maidens rises
from the water and points towards the east bank – the
Heart of Mirkwood. She tells the company that the Elves
went into the dark woods, and are bound for the tree
called the Eilian oak, the Skybridge tree. This is one of the
taller trees in the region, and once marked an old Elf-path
that ran from Amon Lanc to their refuge in the Mountains
of Mirkwood (Heart of the Wild, page 85).

The company may call out to Tinuhel to let the light of
the Lamp shine on the wolf, or to use it as a distraction
or a weapon against the monster. Should they do so, the
Ringwraith comes…

The Coming of the Nazgûl

As they travel, the companions notice the forest changing.
The atmosphere in the Heart of Mirkwood seems less dark
and unfriendly, while the Western Eaves seem to dim by
the hour, as the shadows lengthen visibly.

While Tinuhel fumbles with the sack, a dark figure steps
out of the shadow of the trees. It is man-shaped, and wears
a suit of heavy mail like some black knight out of the East,
but no face is visible in the visored darkness of the helm. A
long sword of steel gleams in one gauntleted hand.

As they follow the Elves through the forest, companions
succeeding in Hunting rolls find signs but not those
left by the thieves. Someone else is hunting them! From
the tracks, the Wayward Elves are being pursued by a
pack of Wargs, and the wild wolves are lead by a much
bigger creature. There are other tracks, too – the booted
footprints of a big man.

A Ringwraith has come: the Lieutenant of Dol Guldur
himself. When the Wayward Elves stole the Lamp the
Werewolf of Mirkwood immediately took notice, and the
Nazgûl rode out to investigate. Now, the Lamp is almost in
his grasp. The Ringwraith turns to face the companions,
while the Werewolf of Mirkwood attacks Tinuhel to take
the Lamp.

From ahead, the companions hear a howl.

Battle at the Skybridge Tree

If the companions intend to face the Werewolf of Mirkwood
AND the Lieutenant of Dol Guldur, they have little hope
of victory. Escaping without much loss will be equally
difficult.

The companions arrive at the clearing around the Eilian
oak and discover that the Wayward Elves are trapped by
wolves. Oldir and Duvainiel have fallen back against a
77

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Fleeing

assigns the Hate points lost between the enemies
in any way he sees fit). It also gives them all the
Craven Trait, so any enemy reduced to 0 Hate flees.
Additionally, a character who attempts the Intimidate
Foe task while the Lamp is shining gets a bonus of +6
to his Awe or Battle roll, and triples any Hate point
loss generated.

If the companions turn and run (using the normal rules
to escape combat, see the Adventurer’s Guide, page 163)
then the Werewolf kills Tinuhel and the Nazgûl takes the
Lamp. The companions will have a chance to regain the
Lamp in Return to Dol Guldur (see page 80) but for the
moment the treasure of the Woodmen is lost.

Uncover the Lamp

Aftermath

A hero who is allowed to take a Rearward stance by his
companions may spend his round to join Tinuhel and
fight the Werewolf, letting her take out the Lamp (this
means that the companion must face the Werewolf alone,
while the Elf opens the sack).

When the companions return to Woodmen-town, they
hear stories of Orc raids in several places along the
Western Eaves. It seems as though the forces of Dol
Guldur took advantage of the dimming of the Lamp
of Balthi to attack. The Orcs took several prisoners,
including, perhaps, people close to the companions:
friends, family members, even rivals might have been
captured by the Orcs.

•

The uncovered Lamp inflicts a loss of Hate points
equal to the roll of two Success dice (the Loremaster

78

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

given the hound, the character must spend the whole
Fellowship phase weaning the pup and training it.

If the companions successfully recovered the Lamp of
Balthi, then they are welcomed as heroes by the Woodmen.
Any Woodman companions may increase their Standing
by one level immediately, and possibly be considered
worthy of raising a Hound of the West (see below).

A Hound of the West works just like a regular Hound of
Mirkwood, with the following special abilities:

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Legends say that sometimes a hound is born in Mirkwood
whose lineage hearkens back to the wondrous beasts
that followed Béma, tamer of animals, when he came
to Middle-earth from West over Sea. Those hounds were
gifted with greater cunning and strength, and some could
even speak with words.
If a companion is a Woodman of good standing (3+) and
possesses the Hound of Mirkwood virtue he may be given
a special pup to raise – a Hound of the West. When first

•

Tearing Jaws: When employing the Harass Enemy
option, a companion engaged in close combat may
choose between having the Hound make a direct
adversary Weary OR raise the hero’s Damage rating
by 3.

•

Bane of Wolves: Wargs and Wolves of the Wild have
a special dread of the Hounds of the West – when such
a hound is involved in a fight, any Wolf-creature is
considered to be Craven.

•

Speech of Mortals: Three times in its life, the Hound
of the West will speak in the Common Tongue.

All is Lost
If it seems as though all is lost and the entire company is about to perish, a kind Loremaster can consider the
intervention of a powerful Loremaster character (a Patron, for example) to rescue them. This sort of deus ex
machina is never the best way to go, and should be employed only if the players have done something to reasonably
prompt this intervention. A Wizard always arrives precisely at the right moment, after all.
Any Wizard, but probably Radagast or Gandalf: The Lamp bursts into a blinding flash that even burns through
the sack (if the Lamp is still covered) and seems to freeze everything in a blue radiance. The Ringwraith and the
Werewolf are temporarily dismayed, and the companions may take the opportunity to flee (but must leave the Lamp).
Saruman: The White Wizard steps into the clearing and stands before the Nazgûl. One of the Wargs snarls at him.
Saruman glances at it, and the beast whimpers and flees. When the Nazgûl raises his sword, Saruman commands
the Lamp to burn. The bag bursts into flame, as does the fur of the wolves nearby.
Beorn: Beorn secretly attended the festival at Woodmen-town (well, as secretly as a mountain of a skinchanging
man-bear can be). He followed the company into the woods when they went in pursuit of the Elves. He bursts into
the clearing and charges the Skybridge tree itself, uprooting it with a mighty effort and toppling it down onto the
Werewolf and the Ringwraith.
Thranduil: The Elvenking learned that the wild Wayward Elves left his domain, and realised what mischief they
intended. He rode out with some of his warriors, and as they drew near to Woodmen-town they sensed the movements
of the Lamp. Though Thranduil is not Elrond or Galadriel, nor Thingol of old nor even his father Oropher, there
is yet power within him, and these are still his woods. Dismayed, the Ringwraith flees.

79

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Year 2966
Events
Rumours of gold in the Mountains of Mirkwood draw
many adventurers, mostly unemployed sell-swords
that were part of the army that went to the Greydelve
in 2964. Few of the new visitors find the gloomy woods
welcoming, and some perish or go missing in the wooded
hills. Still, seven enterprising Dwarves and their followers
establish a mining camp some miles east of the source of
the Enchanted Stream. They find little gold, so they start
searching the Elven ruins in the mountains looking for
buried treasure.
Quarrels with the Wayward Elves grow after the events of
last year. Thranduil punishes Tinuhel, Oldir and Duvainiel
(or, at least, those who survived) by sending them to guard
the northern frontier. Other Elves are displeased by the
miners and ruffians attracted by the tales of gold in the
hills to the south.
If Radagast went missing and left after the events of
Saving the Maiden then he returns this year. If he left
because of his grief, for several weeks he appears as if he
forgot the art of human speech - he speaks only in grunts
and animal noises, mixed with a few words of Highelven. If he left after breaking his staff, he returns with a
new one, wearing cleaner robes and a lofty demeanour,
courtesy of long years studying under Saruman the White.

heavy rains made the swamps around the area virtually
impassable, even across the narrow bridge of stone that
links Fenbridge Castle to Dol Guldur, but the prisoners
will soon be moved to the dark hold. If the companions
are to have any hope of rescuing those who were lost, this
is their best opportunity to do so.

Rescuing the Prisoners
Someone of authority (a patron, perhaps) summons the
company to Rhosgobel early that spring. If any of the
companions travelled with Radagast before (for example,
sixteen years before - see Secrets Buried, page 20) then it is
the Brown Wizard who personally insists on seeing them
with urgency; the same happens if any hero is a relative of
one of those companions.
Once in Rhosgobel, the companions meet with Radagast,
and there they must prepare a plan to rescue the prisoners.
The following matters are discussed:
•

Dol Guldur is fully rebuilt, and is again a place of
terror. If the prisoners reach the black hold, the
chances of rescuing them become desperate. The
best opportunity for success is to intercept them as
they make their way through the swampy woodlands
north of the fortress.

•

The Orcs use the Fenbridge to get to Dol Guldur –
a winding path of some twenty miles through the
marshes. This is the only safe path through the bogs.

•

The prisoners will probably be sick, weak and scared.
If they are to be rescued, then the companions will
need to have a plan to get them safely across the
wilderness.

•

The nearest refuge in Mirkwood is the Tyrant’s Hill
(assuming that Mogdred is an ally of the Woodmen).
Another option would be to exit the forest going west,
into the Vales of Anduin. Mirkwood is perilous, but it
may be easier to slip away from pursuers in the darkness
of the woods than in the open terrain of the Vales.

Word comes from the East Bight that a sickness stalks the
followers of Ceawin of Sunstead. Many have died, and
many more are ill. He calls for aid from the healers of the
Woodmen.

Adventuring Phase:
Return to Dol Guldur
Having learned of the Orc-raids that occurred last Yule,
Radagast sends more of his birds and beasts to spy upon
Dol Guldur. He soon discovers that many prisoners (and
the Lamp of Balthi, if it was stolen) are currently locked
in Fenbridge Castle (Heart of the Wild, page 108) –
80

Radagast believes that the best approach is to cause a
distraction while the prisoners are rescued. His talents
lie more in the fields of hiding and healing, so he thinks

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

and when one topples, the Orcs build on top of the ruins.
One day, the castle will have a firm foundation of its own
past incarnations, but that time is far ahead in the future.
Now, Fenbridge is a ramshackle hulk of stone and wood,
a fortress that rots from within. Orcs watch from its walls,
and bats flitter overhead. The howling of Wargs masks the
moans of the unfortunate slaves trapped within its grim
walls.

that he should accompany the party sent to rescue the
prisoners.
If Gandalf is present, then he volunteers to create a
diversion. “I have some small talent with fireworks,” he
says, puffing on his pipe.
Beorn, if present, grunts and says that he will make sure
that all the watchers in Dol Guldur are looking the wrong
way at the right time.

Fenbridge Castle has two gates. One faces north-east, the
other south-west. A path, now mostly overgrown, runs up
to the north-east gate. The Fenbridge itself leads out from
the southern gate. At the start, the bridge is a causeway
supported by stone pillars dug deep into the mire, and
stands more than a dozen feet proud of the surrounding
terrain. Later, the path drops into the swamp and it
becomes hard to tell stone from sucking mud.

If none of these are present, then the companions must
come up with their own distraction. They might seek out
help (from Beorn, Thranduil or some other power), gather
forces to launch a sortie against Dol Guldur, or plan to
attack some other outpost of the enemy such as the
Tyrant’s Hill or Fenbridge Castle).

To Fenbridge Castle

A black squirrel darts out of the trees and bids the company
to follow it. This is one of Radagast’s creatures, and it leads
the company through a narrow defile in the woods that
conceals their passage from the sentries in the Fenbridge.
The defile leads to the edge of the marsh. For as far as the
eye can see (admittedly, in Mirkwood, that usually means
”to the end of your arm on a good day”) is a wasteland of
stagnant pools, mud, weeds and tangled roots. Off to the
left, the Fenbridge runs south, and the company can see the
occasional flare of torchlight as Orcs patrol it.

Radagast the Brown accompanies the companions and
his arts make the journey shorter and less dangerous.
Assuming the journey starts at Black Tarn Hall, then it
covers forty miles across the Narrows of the Forest, taking
four days and one Fatigue test at TN 16, but requiring no
Corruption tests. Then, the company trudges through
fifty miles of deep forest across Southern Mirkwood. It
takes the company ten days and two Fatigue tests at TN
18 to arrive in sight of Fenbridge Castle. As soon as the
company reaches its destination, every companion will
have to pass one Corruption test every day.

Stalking the Foe
One wet and misty morning, the prisoners leave the castle
in chains. The grim procession is guarded by a dozen Orc
soldiers, six Orc Guards and a mean-looking Hill-Troll Chief
carrying a spiked buckler of iron. (If the Lamp of Balthi was
captured, then in place of the Hill-Troll Chief there are two
Hill-Trolls carrying a heavy chest between them.

If the companions encounter any spies or agents of the
enemy, then they must take care to ensure that word of
their presence does not reach Dol Guldur – secrecy is allimportant if this rescue is to be successful.
As the companions draw closer to the Fenbridge, Stealth
tests are required to avoid being spotted by an Orc patrol.
In case of a failure, the company is chased through the
trees. The heroes must either evade the Orcs, or turn and
slay them all.

There are fifteen chained prisoners. Most of them were
taken when the enemy attacked the Woodmen last Yule;
others were captured several years ago. If any of the
company’s allies or kin were kidnapped or disappeared
in previous adventures, they may be among the prisoners.

At the Fenbridge
Ahead, the moss-stained walls of Fenbridge Castle rise
from the murk. The castle is built on the remains of itself.
The towers and walls sink slipshod into the soft ground,

Maghaz himself leads the group, although the canny
old Orc is careful to have a pair of big Orc Guards at the
head of the procession, while he stays near the Hill-troll
81

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

(or Trolls) – if any sneaky Elf archer is in the woods, he’d
prefer for someone else to take the place of honour and
any associated arrow!
The prisoners travel around five miles per day, as both
Orcs and prisoners are laden with heavy loads. This means
it takes the convoy almost four days to move through the
swamps to Dol Guldur.
•

•

The area around Dol Guldur makes for exceedingly
hard going. Every companion must make a Fatigue
test and a Corruption test every day (all at TN 18).
Any C result potentially reveals the position of the
company to the Orc guards marching on the bridge.

The companions can choose to launch their ambush
at any time. If they wait for a day or two, then it will be
unlikely that Maghaz will receive reinforcements from Dol
Guldur or Fenbridge Castle, but they will be right in the
middle of the marsh with their rescued prisoners.

The Ambush
When the companions are ready, then Radagast sends a
sparrow to signal the time to attack to whatever allies lie
in wait to cause a diversion. An hour later, the distraction
begins. In the distance, the companions hear the sound of
whatever they have agreed to make happen. The diversion
is aimed at the watchful eyes in Dol Guldur and Fenbridge
Castle, not at the Orcs guarding the prisoners.
82

The Orc procession halts on a little grassy hillock.
Maghaz sends three Orc-guards off to investigate, while
he commands the Orc Soldiers to get into a defensive
position on the hillock. The prisoners are made to sit on
top of it, while the Orcs form a ring around the prisoners,
facing out, while Maghaz and the remaining three Orc
Guards keep order inside. The Hill-troll takes position on
the causeway (if there are two Trolls, one remains close to
the hillock, guarding the chest containing the Lamp).
Attempting to ambush the Orcs in their defensive position
would normally require the companions to make Battle
rolls against TN 18. Luckily for them, Radagast has
something in mind: he starts whistling softly using a
small clay flute, and in a short while the whole forest
surrounding the Orcs and the company comes alive with
the chirping of birds, the croaking of frogs and the hissing
of snakes. The echo of the animal voices is so bewildering
that if the companions attack now, their Battle rolls to
ambush the Orcs would only face a TN of 12.
Still, the companions face stiff opposition. They will
require all their strength, heart and wits to overcome their
enemies.

The Chest of the Lamp
If the company recapture the Lamp, they find it is locked
inside a heavy chest. A companion with Burglary can pick
the lock, otherwise a successful Craft roll will do. If the
companions cannot open the chest, they will have to carry

The Gathering Gloom:
2961-2966

Guldur storms out of the fortress with Wargs and Orctrackers in his wake. Each day, the companions must pass
either a Hunting or a Stealth roll to evade their pursuers;
the TN for these tests is TN 14 in Mirkwood or TN 18 on
open ground. Three successful tests in a row means they
have evaded the hunters; three failed tests or a failure
with an C means the enemy catches them.

it: it has an Encumbrance of 30. Two or more characters
can carry the chest together. The Lamp on its own has an
Encumbrance of 5.

Escape
Once the companions rescue the prisoners, they can flee
across the marsh. It takes two days to reach the edge of
the marsh if the companions ambushed the Orcs near
Fenbridge Castle or Dol Guldur, or four days if they
ambushed the Orcs midway through the march across the
causeway. Again, while still in the marshes all companions
must make a Fatigue test and a Corruption test every day
(all at TN 18).

The Lamp is Lost
If disaster strikes and the Lamp of Balthi is lost to

the shadows of Dol Guldur, then the companions will
have to recover it somehow, or the woods will soon be
lost to the Shadow. Fortunately, the secret passageway
used by Gandalf to enter Dol Guldur is still open, so the

At the edge of the swamp, the companions have about
twelve miles of thick forest to cross if they are heading for
open ground (one day with Radagast), or another fifty
miles if they head back to the Narrows (ten days and two
Fatigue tests, TN 18). Companions on open ground will
be pursued (see below) until they reach Rhosgobel or a
similar sanctuary, or cross the Great River.
•

companions can creep into the tunnels under the Hill.

Surviving and escaping that hellish place, though, is
extremely unlikely.

Returning Home
If the companions manage to return home with the
prisoners and the recovered Lamp, they are hailed as
heroes by the folk of the Wood. A feast is held in their
honour: Woodmen characters gain one level of Standing.

For the length of their flight, every C result the
companions roll on their tests, a prisoner must be
left behind or carried, as he cannot walk any more.
For each prisoner being carried one companion must
make an additional Fatigue test. Leaving behind
an exhausted survivor gains each companion five
Shadow points.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Companions who took part in the saving of the prisoners
from Dol Guldur and who do not belong to the Woodmen
may choose the Receive Title (Hero of the Woodmen)
undertaking this year (see box).

Pursuit
Dol Guldur does not let its prisoners go so easily. Once
the surviving Orcs raise the alarm, the Lieutenant of Dol

Receive Title (Hero of the Woodmen)
The companion is invited by the Council of Elders to become
a member of the folk of the Woodmen, as a recognition for
his deeds. To accept the title, the adventurer must spend
the Fellowship phase in any Woodman settlement of the
Western Eaves and choose the Receive Title undertaking.
The Standing rating of the adventurer now measures
also his repute among the Woodmen. The hero may now
affect the narration of a Year’s End Fellowship phase

83

as if he belonged to the Woodmen culture. Additionally,
when a companion spends a Fellowship phase among the
Woodmen, his score is not reduced, as if he returned home
(see Standing Upkeep at p. 169 of the Adventurer’s
Guide).
The hero can freely dwell in a guest-house in Woodmentown, or in a cottage in Rhosgobel, or maybe even in a
tree-house in Woodland Hall (or in a house in Black Tarn
Hall or Sunstead). The comfort of the lodging should be
proportionate to the character’s Standard of Living.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

the deaths of family members and friends. Companions
afflicted by this dreams must make a Corruption test and
gain a point of Shadow upon a failure.

The Years of the
Plague:

2967-2974

Mirkwood is plagued by a wasting sickness that claims
innumerable lives. The Woodland Realm is besieged by
evil creatures from the Mountains of Mirkwood, and the
paths through the forest are threatened. The power in Dol
Guldur stirs and shakes the foundations of all realms in
Wilderland.

Year 2967
Events
One of the smaller settlements in the East Bight vanishes
during the winter. Scouts from Sunstead find that the
village was abandoned, but there are no clear signs as to
why nearly a hundred settlers fled their homes. Carved
into one post in the longhouse, though, are the runes for
the word “Raegenhere”.
Many throughout Mirkwood (those with a Shadow rating
of 3 or more) suffer from terrible dreams this year. They
are tormented by visions of death and suffering, including

84

For several weeks in the autumn of this year, the magic
of the Elvenking seems to fail. Spiders swarm onto the
Elf-path, occupying a long stretch of the track from the
Enchanted Stream to the edge of Western Mirkwood.

Adventuring Phase:
Treachery in the Woods
This adventure takes place in Thranduil’s Halls in the
Woodland Realm. If the companions are regular visitors
to the Halls, then they may be in attendance at the
Elvenking’s court when this adventure begins. Otherwise,
they may be visiting the court on other business, or be
part of King Bard’s mission to the Elves.
After recent troubles, King Bard decides to court the favour
of his ally, the Elvenking. He dispatches a group of nobles
and ambassadors from Dale to bring gifts to Thranduil,
and to discuss the quarrels with the foresters along the
eastern eaves of the Woodland Realm and other disputes.
Emissaries also go from Lake-town and – grudgingly –
from Erebor.

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

day of the gathering, to celebrate any treaty or agreement
the envoys may have stipulated with the Elvenking - or
to sweeten the bitter taste of failure. The council will be
restricted to the more important envoys, and Halbrech
plans to leave his daughter Hanna out of it, to avoid any
risk of her tasting the poisoned wine. This concern, added
to the wineseller, great fear of the Ringwraiths, makes
Halbrech extremely nervous and unusually gloomy.

The envoys gather in Esgaroth, then take a boat through
the marshes and up the Forest River to the gates of the
Halls, where they wait for an audience with the Elvenking.

Affairs of Court
Attending the Elvenking’s court is an encounter;
Thranduil’s Tolerance is based on either Valour or
Wisdom depending on what favours the companions
seek. If they wish to discuss matters of war or security,
then he listens more to the Valorous; on matters of trade,
lore or the cause of the growing darkness, he turns to
the Wise. The company may also have business with the
delegates from Dale or Lake-town.

A successful Insight roll made during the first day of the
gathering notices that Hanna seems concerned about her
father’s health, although Halbrech seems hale and strong
for a man of his years.

A Cup of Poison

The visitors are feasted and entertained by the Elves for
two days. Notably, old Halbrech the Wineseller – now
nearly sixty years old and a source of fascination for the
immortal Elves – breaks out the finest vintages, including
a special treat brought from over the Misty Mountains
and far away: a few bottles of wine from the vineyards
of the Southfarthing in the Shire! If they never met her
before, Halbrech also introduces his daughter Hanna to
the visitors. She is now seventeen years old, and serves as
her father’s scribe and assistant; it is clear that Halbrech
intends for Hanna to take over the role his grandfather
and father held before him.

The attendants of the second day of the council are the
most important notables sent from Dale, Esgaroth and
Erebor. At this point of the campaign, it is difficult to
determine who exactly these prominent personalities are,
but the Loremaster should make sure these are figures
known to the companions, and possibly dear to them. The
Elvenking is certainly included among them.
It is also likely that the heroes themselves are counted
in the restricted council, if their renown (and Standing
ratings) allow for it. All who take part in the council risk
their lives, as the assassination attempt aims to rob the
folks of the North of several noteworthy dignitaries in one
fell blow.

The Treachery of the Wineseller
Secretly, Halbrech has once again fallen under the Shadow.
Many years ago, he was a spy in the Elvenking’s Halls (see
the adventure Secrets Buried), and now the Ringwraiths
of Dol Guldur have called on him to serve again. The
Woodland Realm is too strong to assault directly, but it
can still fall to treachery.

A Loving Daughter
The companions have a better chance to avoid this
dreadful fate if they befriend Halbrech’s daughter Hanna
(or if they befriended her on a previous occasion). Hanna
is very worried about her father. He is nothing like his
usual self, a change that is escaping both the guests and
the Elves, who rarely concern themselves with the moods
of mortals, but something that a loving daughter will
never fail to notice.

The Messenger of Mordor himself rode to the Woodland
Realm, and one foggy night the black-cloaked figure
met Halbrech in a spot near the village of the Raft-elves.
After many years without contacts with the Shadow the
wineseller was overwhelmed with terror, and accepted
trembling a vial of poison from the gauntleted hands of
the Ringwraith, along with precise instructions on how to
employ it.
The plan is to poison the Elvenking’s own reserve of
Dorwinion wine, the one meant for the king’s feasts only.
This special vintage will be served at the end of the second

If the companions confront Halbrech before the end of the
second day, the wineseller first denies everything, then
tries to ascertain if the heroes are capable of keeping his
daughter safe; as his actions will demonstrate, he has
already forfeited his own life (see Halbrech’s Fate, page
86), but might reconsider bringing his plan to completion
85

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

if he is convinced that Hanna has nothing to fear from the
retaliation of the Messenger of Mordor - the Ringwraith
promised to torture and slay him and his family if he
refused to carry out the treacherous plan.

A Bitter Hour
If the companions remain completely oblivious to what
is happening behind their backs, then disaster strikes.
Everyone who drinks from the poisoned wine contracts a
fierce form of the malady known as the Black Shadow (see
page 128) and slips into a fevered sleep lasting several days.
•

•

A companion who contracts the Black Shadow must
pass a Corruption test with TN 20 each day for eight
days, or gain a point of Shadow (a Healing roll a day
reduces the TN to 18). If the victim’s Shadow rating
overcomes his Hope score before the end of the eightday period, then the character slips into ever deeper
dreams and dies. If the victim resists for eight days,
he finally overcomes his sickness and wakes up (but
maintains the new Shadow score).
All Loremaster characters who took part in the
council becomes violently sick and eventually die. If
the Loremaster needs a random method to determine
who lives or dies he may roll the Feat die for every
victim of the Black Shadow: a character endures the
malady only if the result shows a A.

86

•

The Elvenking himself drinks deeply from the
Dorwinion reserve, and falls unconscious along with
the other victims. But the blood of Thranduil is stronger
than that of most of those who live in Middle-earth and
it eventually overcomes the poison that burns in its
veins. But for the Elvenking the struggle lasts for years
instead of days… (see The Ailing King box).

The Ailing King
If Thranduil is poisoned, then his son Legolas and
a trusted circle of advisors step up to lead the realm

while the Elvenking heals. During this period of

interregnum, the Wayward Elves gains more and more
clout, as the Silvan Elves become ever more reclusive
and parochial. An adventure focused on finding a cure
for the ailing king might lead the companions to seek

help in distant lands, such as the elusive stronghold of
Rivendell, or the fabled Golden Wood of Lothlórien.

If Thranduil is left to his own devices, then he wakes
up three years later, in the year 2970.

Halbrech’s Fate
Whether the wineseller succeeded in poisoning the
ambassadors and the Elvenking or not, Halbrech’s fate is

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

sealed. The traitor doesn’t wait to be discovered: if the
companions seek him out, they find him in the deepest
cellar of the halls, standing next to the open trapdoor. The
sound of the rushing river echoes through the chamber.

Searching Halbrech’s room reveals a false bottom in one
chest of clothes; inside are sketches of the Halls, notes
on its defences, and estimates of the number of warriors
in Thranduil’s command. These notes are written in the
Common tongue, and are clearly more recent versions of
the notes found in Dol Guldur all those years ago.

If confronted, Halbrech admits everything this time – for
many years, he has been in the service of Dol Guldur.
They tricked him into spying for them, long ago, and now
he is involved too deeply to have any hope left. He has
seen the shadows that dwell in Dol Guldur, he knows
their plans. Already, the forest grows darker, and soon
all Mirkwood will be theirs. Against this Enemy, there
can be no victory.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Companions may choose the Search for Answers
undertaking this year to investigate the name “Raegenhere”.
If they do, they may learn it was the name of one of the
old kings of the Northmen who lies buried in a barrow
under Mirkwood. In fact – it is the very barrow that the
company visited in The Helm of Peace (see page 24).

And he hurls himself down the trapdoor to perish in the
waters below.

The Plague of Mirkwood
An ill wind blows out of Dol Guldur in the coming years. This evil breath carries a virulent plague, and many
among the Woodmen start to sicken and die. In time, the illness spreads throughout the North, as the plague spreads
through contact, but also seems to seep down from the mould that grows on the blackened trees. Only the Elves seem
immune to the terrible disease.

The plague starts with a racking cough, a fever, weakness, and aches in the arms and legs. If the victim is lucky,
then this is as far as the plague goes, and the fortunate fellow recovers within a few weeks.

The second stage of the plague comes in the form of strange, yellowish pustules. These growths start around the

nose and mouth, but quickly spread to the hands. These pustules weep a clear liquid that carries the infection. This
stage of the plague is almost always lethal. If the pustules dry up and become hard, warty growths, then the victim
is sure to die.

The third stage of the plague signals the approach of death. The warts spread all over the victim’s body, sometimes

growing into weird bark-like formations. The patient’s limbs convulse, then lock into twisted, agonising positions.

The patient’s muscles freeze, preventing them from moving, eating or doing anything but drawing shallow, terrified
breaths and staring out from the prison of their own flesh.

This strange stiffness does not relent with death; in fact, it gets worse. The warts turn brown or grey as the patient

dies, so the twisted rigour mortis of the victim resembles nothing so much as a fallen tree limb. It is as though the
forest of Mirkwood claims the dead, absorbing them into its gloomy realm.

87

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Players & the Plague
Heroes deserve heroic deaths, but life – and death – is not always fair. If the companions expose themselves to the

plague (for example, they are trapped inside a building with the plague-ridden for days, or they heroically enter a
plagued village to rescue a victim) they run the risk of infection. When this happens, the Loremaster may require a

roll using the Feat die. If the result is equal to or lower than the character’s basic Body or Heart scores, whichever
is higher, the victim suffers lightly from the exposition to the plague (first stage) but recovers quickly. If the result
is higher, the victim succumbs to the illness and may perish. An C means the victim’s deterioration is quicker

and more grievous (any Healing test is made at one difficulty level higher, see Treating the Plague, below); A
indicates that the character was not infected at all and is immune.

The plague is weaker outside Mirkwood. Beyond the forest eaves, use the victim’s Attribute level +3 when rolling
the Feat die.

Treating the Plague
If caught early enough, the plague can be treated by a character possessing the Leechcraft Trait (or a suitable
Loremaster character). The healer may treat a patient with a number of Healing rolls up to the basic Body

rating of the victim. The TN is 12, or 16 in Mirkwood. The treatment takes several days of constant care. A
healer may simultaneously treat a number of patients equal to his Healing rating.

A success in the Healing roll allows the victim to roll the Feat die again once, twice on a great or extraordinary

success. A sick character is saved when he finally rolls equal to or lower than his Body or Heart score, or upon a A

result. If the character does not recover before the healer runs out of the allowed number of rolls, he succumbs to the
plague and dies.

Year 2968

This year, rumours speak of eerie lights flickering in the
depths of the forest. Some tales claim that the lights hover
above buried treasure; others say that the lights are Elvish
trickery, and those who follow them will become lost in
Mirkwood and wander until they perish.

Events
While travelling in Mirkwood, the companions come
across a recently abandoned camp. The ashes of the fire
are cold, but the camp was inhabited up to a week ago.
Searching around, they find a recently-dug mass grave
where at least a dozen bodies lie.

Word comes from the north of trouble at King Bard’s court.
Some of the nobles of Dale have grown greedy and proud.
As wealth and prosperity continues to make the kingdom
stronger, some nobles agitate for Bard to exert his power
more. They want Dale to seize the eastern woodlands
from the Elves, so there will be firewood for the winter and
timber for building, and to reclaim Lake-town and its rich
trade for the kingdom.

A hideous vampire-bat flits down the Mountains of
Mirkwood and makes its hellish nest in the trees near the
residence of one of the companions. The monster proceeds
to suck the blood from one of the companion’s relatives,
children or friends. Unless the companions discover the
vampire and deal with it, the victim sickens and dies.

Beorn decides that the time has come for him to take a
wife. His bride might be the daughter of a simple farmer,
88

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

a princess of the Woodmen or a strange woman from the
mountains. Perhaps he marries one of the companions!
In any event, heroes from all over Wilderland attend
his wedding at the Carrock. Afterwards, it is said that
Beorn’s joyous laughter was so loud it echoed off the
Misty Mountains and could be heard from the Vales of
Gundabad to the Falls of Rauros.

Adventuring Phase:
Nine in the Hall
This adventure takes place in the East Bight, during the
winter. There are many reasons why the companions
might be in Sunstead during this time of year:

with either Ceawin or Mordern, as appropriate.In either
case, the possessing Wood-wight was an ancient king of
the Northmen, by the name of Raegenhere. He intends to
murder everyone in the hall, one by one.

The Haunted House
When the companions first arrive at the longhouse they
are looking for shelter from a terrible snowstorm. There
are fell voices on the winds that carry the snow, and the
bite of the cold is ferocious (every companion must roll the
Feat die and lose that amount in Endurance points). The
weather shows no sign of abating; the companions must
take shelter or perish.

•

They might be there to investigate rumours of the
plague.

Knocking at the door of the longhouse they are greeted by
the Host. If they have not had dealing with the host before,
then an introduction might be in order - Courtesy or Awe
will do - the Host, of course, welcomes them in.

•

Ceawin called for their aid in fighting some threat.

The Others

•

They are inquiring about the disappearance of the
village (see the entry for last year).

There are eight other guests staying in the Hall tonight.

•

Their work with Bofri the Dwarf brings them to the
forests of the East Bight.

•

They return from a journey to the East or South and
shelter in Sunstead for the winter.

•

The adventure begins when the companions take shelter
in a longhouse for the winter. If the company failed to
save Ceawin from the Wood-wight in The Helm of Peace,
then they stay in Ceawin’s own great house in Sunstead.
Otherwise, the longhouse is one on the north side of the
East Bight, ruled by a warrior named Mordern.

Geleswinta is off-putting and alarming. Gasp for breath,
mutter to yourself, and try to warn the companions of the
danger without ever mentioning the Host.
•

Secrets of the House
The lord of the longhouse hides a secret. If that lord is
Ceawin, then the circumstances by which he became
a thrall of the Wood-wights are already known to the
Loremaster. If the companions are staying under the
roof of Mordern, then their host became possessed when
he stole from one of the barrows in the shadows of the
wood. Throughout this adventure, the lord of the house
is referred to as the Host; replace references to the Host
89

Old Geleswinta: The mother of the Host, this old
crone is toothless, blind and more than half mad. She
knows that her son is not what he appears to be – that
another spirit inhabits his flesh – but she dares not
speak openly of the truth to foreigners.

Grimfried: A taciturn forester and warrior, recently
returned from the war fought to reclaim the Greydelve.
He brought gold and settled in Sunstead, but when his
treasure ran out, so too did his welcome, for Grimfried
is a violent and unpleasant man. He intends to travel
to the Tyrant’s Hill once the trail clears.

Grimfried clearly lusts after Berana, as well as any
suitable female companions. He’s a lecherous lout who
tries to buy women with gold – or takes them by force, if
the opportunity arises.
•

Burin the Dwarf Merchant: A Dwarf from the
Lonely Mountain, Burin came to Sunstead to trade

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

and was caught by the storm. He has a fat purse of
gold, and suspects that everyone else is trying to rob
him. He wants to leave as soon as he can.

Burin is suspicious and miserly – he’s the worst sort of
money-obsessed Dwarf. He is not a coward, and will aid
the companions if pressed, but any heroism in him is
buried very deeply indeed.
•

Ingel, Berana and Radagasa: Ingel and Berana
are a young couple who settled in the East Bight some
years ago; their daughter Radagasa is four years old.
Ingel is a simple farmer, with a remarkably beautiful
wife. The roof of their cottage collapsed under the
weight of the snow, so they fled to this hall for shelter.

These three are innocent victims in this affair. They are
simple folk, trying to survive on the edge of Mirkwood,
unprepared for the darkness to come.
•

Gwina: Featured in Heart of the Wild (page 100),
Gwina is a trader from Dorwinion. She has travelled
far in her lifetime, but now she grows old and intends
to settle down in Lake-town. She came to the East Bight
to visit one of her former crewmen who lives here, a
man named Signar, but she found no sign of him (he
is a previous victim of the Host).

•

The Ill-Favoured Man: His name is Angivisell;
sharp-toothed and cruel-eyed, he looks like there
is Orcish blood in his ancestry. He arrives after the
companions have entered the hall and is a spy for Dol
Guldur.

Angivisell is not the villain in this adventure. He suffers
from the plague that is about to descend on Mirkwood,
and dies from his infection early in the adventure.

The Host
The Host is either Ceawin or Mordern. If it is Mordern,
then he is a tall, strong man. He is no longer young, but
has the corded muscles and deep-set strength of one who
has toiled and fought all his life. This hall is his home and
his domain, and he speaks with a commanding voice. A
huge great axe hangs above the hearth.

The Hall
The Host’s hall is a fine building, one of the strongest
in Sunstead. The walls are stone for the most part, with
heavy wooden doors. The roof is thatched, and supported
by eight huge wooden pillars carved from tree-trunks. The
floor is entirely covered with skins and rich rugs to keep
away the cold. There are three exits – the front door, the
stable door, and a small side door.

90

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

The hall consists of one main room, with storerooms and
stables at the back. There are cramped sleeping quarters
in a loft above the door. While there are small lamps to
illuminate the hall, the Host ran out of lamp-oil some
weeks ago, so the only light comes from the flickering
flames of the fire in the heart – most of the hall is in
darkness.

•

The Ill-Favoured man is sick. He coughs and shivers
even after warming himself by the fire, and his spittle
is flecked with blood. Any character with Healing
notices that he has alarming pustules on his neck and
behind his ears, suggesting that his illness is some
sort of plague.

•

Each companion must roll the Feat die at this point
(see Players & the Plague, page 88). The reason for
the roll is left unspecified by the Loremaster, who
may hint that the companions may be infected by the
plague if they roll badly.

Hidden beneath the rugs and skins and stuffed into the
thatch are the remains of the host’s previous victims. More
than thirty corpses – or the parts of thirty corpses, at any
rate – lie hidden here, frozen stiff and caked with blood.

Burin Vanishes

Events in the Hall
The timing on these events is left deliberately loose. The
adventure might take place over several days or in a single
night.

The Dwarf wanders into the darkness of the hall – and
does not return. He could have crept out the side door or
the stable door without anyone noticing and most people
in the hall assume that the unpleasant Dwarf slipped out
without saying farewell.

Dinner in the Hall

•

The Host invites the companions to dine with him and his
other guests. Supplies run low, but he still has one last goat
to slaughter. He hefts his axe and goes to the back room to
kill the animal. Gwina and Berana prepare the meal, while
Grimfried gets drunk on mead and shares lustful comments
with Burin and anyone else who will listen.

A successful Search test finds a pouch of gold (10
Treasure) forgotten in a corner.

The Sick Child
Young Radagasa starts coughing, and soon develops a
fever. A successful Healing test is required to keep her
conscious.
All companions must now pass a Corruption test or
else gain a Shadow point, as the night draws in and
an unnatural terror seems to fall upon everyone in the
house.

•

The Loremaster should use the dinner to briefly
introduce the other guests. Everyone is worried about
this unnatural winter, but are hopeful that the storm
will break soon and that spring will come on its heels.

•

•

Burin is suspicious of the companions, and accuses
them of being brigands (unless there is a Dwarf in the
company, in which case he confides in his kinsman).

No Firewood
The fire runs low and needs fuel. The firewood that was
stacked outside the door is gone. Someone needs to go
fetch more wood; there is a stand of trees only a short
distance away, but someone has to go and chop it.

The Ill-Favoured Man Arrives
There is a knock at the door, a frantic hammering. It is the
Ill-Favoured Man. If allowed entry to the hall, he speaks
of seeing white faces amid the snow, and claims that the
hall is surrounded. If the companions investigate (losing
another Feat die worth of Endurance points), they find
that the firewood that was stacked by the side door is
gone. There are several strange prints in the snow – the
footprints of booted Wood-wights.

•

91

Any companions who go out to fetch wood are
attacked by Wood-wights. The spectres leer out of the
swirling snow and seem to vanish into the wild white
landscape (the Loremaster applies the Wights’ Strike
Fear ability).

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

•

thuggish warrior? One of their own? Handing over a
victim in this fashion is a Misdeed and results in the
mandatory gain of several Shadow points.

Once it becomes clear that the hall is under siege by
spectres, everyone must pass another Corruption
test or gain 1 Shadow point.

The Ill-Favoured Man Dies

The Herb

Angivisell succumbs to his illness. He doubles over in pain,
then coughs and chokes, spitting blood over everyone
nearby.

Geleswinta volunteers to help with the sick child. The
old woman hobbles over to examine the sick child. After
poking and prodding Radagasa for a few minutes, she
mutters about a herb that can help with fever. It is called
simbelmynë, and is a white flower that grows on certain
mounds and ditches. Place it in boiling water, she says,
and let the child breathe the vapours.

•

Anyone who was near Angivisell when he died must
roll the Feat die again to check for infection from the
plague.

Grimfried’s Lust

•

Drunk on mead and half-convinced that everyone in
the hall is doomed anyway, Grimfried attacks Berana.
Berana’s husband Ingel tries to stop the warrior, but
Grimfried is much stronger and smashes Ingel to the floor.
It is up to the company to stop Grimfried.
•

•

The Host stands by and does not react, while Gwina
comforts the sick child.
Assuming they restrain Grimfried, Ingel demands that
they throw the warrior out of the hall as punishment
for his crime.

Any companion with Herb-lore or Leechcraft
recognises simbelmynë (Evermind in the Common
tongue, uilos in Sindarin). It is a white flower that
grows on the barrows of the dead. It has no known
healing power, but common wisdom attributes it the
power to keep the dead safe from the influence of evil
spirits.

There are mounds just within the forest edge where
Evermind may yet be found amid the snows. Ideally, some
of the company leave the hall in search of the herb, while
others stay behind to defend against the lurking Woodwights.

Siege of the Wights

At the Mounds

The companions hear scratching coming from outside.
The Wood-wights are coming! Soon, bony fists hammer
on the doors, and the spectres try to claw their way
inside.

Those who go in search of the herb are beset by Woodwights, who try to capture them and bury them in the
mounds, dressed in burial shrouds and grave goods.

•

•

•

The Wood-wights’ goal is to sow terror, not to kill the
companions – that is an honour reserved for their
chieftain, the Host. Therefore, the spectres demands
that the companions give them a sacrifice by handing
over one of the living in the hall.

•

The Dwarf Burin lies there already, killed by terror.

•

If the companions played through The Helm of Peace,
then they recognise these mounds as the same ones
they (or their previous characters!) visited all those
years ago. The largest mound is empty. Runes on
the wall read “Raegenhere King sleeps here/until the
world’s ending. Cursed be he who moves these bones/
And cursed be the Wight that wears them.”

•

On another wall is a carving of a great king –
presumably Raegenhere – wielding a magnificent axe.
It is the same axe carried by the Host.

If the companions refuse, the Wood-wights laugh
mockingly and say that they will take what they want
before the storm breaks. They will take everyone.
If the companions agree, they must choose who to
sacrifice. The mad old woman? The dying child? The
92

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

Blood Dripping

Raegenhere (incarnated Wood-wight)

Meanwhile, back in the hall, one of the other survivors
throws more wood on the fire. The flames blaze up,
bringing a pleasant heat to the icy hall. For a moment, it is
almost as though the end of the storm has come and that
the nightmare is over. Then blood starts to drip from the
ceiling, as the heat from the fire thaws some of the frozen
bodies hidden in the thatch.
•

Seeing that is certainly a source of Anguish, and is
worth another Corruption test (one Shadow point).

Escaping the Hall
The Host waits for the companions to weaken, as they
face the various threats of the haunted hall. But soon the
possessed lord of the hall will make his move and attack;
he will swing his great axe with one hand, while he claws
at his opponents with the other.
Hopefully, by that time the companions will have realised
that the hall is not a place of safety, and will not be taken
excessively by surprise - their task will become to rescue
the remaining victims from the Host’s clutches and defeat
the spirit.

Attribute Level
8

Endurance

Hate

70

10

Parry

Armour

7

3d

Skills
Personality, 3
Movement, 3

Custom, 4

Perception, 3

Vocation, 3

Weapon Skills
Great axe

3

Strangling Claws

3

Special Abilities
Denizen of the Dark

Hideous Toughness

Savage Assault

Fear of Fire

Weapons:
Weapon

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

Great axe

9

C

20

Break
shield

Claws

5

C

16

-

type

•

When a direct confrontation with the Host is finally
reached, there is one Wood-wight per companion, as
well as Raegenhere himself (see his stats below). The
Wood-wights flee if Raegenhere is defeated.

•

Geleswinta’s mumblings about the herb have more
than a grain of truth in them – if Evermind flowers
are thrown in boiling water, then the steam that rises
in the hall weakens the bond that ties the spirit of
Raegenhere to its host body (Ceawin or Mordern). The
spectral form of the Wight flows of out of the victim’s
body and hangs in the air like some nightmare made
real.

•

Defeating Raegenhere’s physical form results also in
the death of the host body. While disembodied, the
Wight can be slain only if struck by his own axe.
Otherwise, it flees into the night.

93

Survival, 2

Aftermath
If the companions slay Raegenhere, then the unnatural
storm breaks and the blizzard subsides. If they managed
to defeat the Wight without killing the Host, the grateful
lord of the hall rewards them with the treasure from
the restless king’s barrow (50 Treasure). However, if the
companions were forced to slay the Host along with the
Wight, then they may be accused of murder, especially if
they killed Ceawin.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Nothing of note.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Year 2969
Events
In this year, Spiders and bats from the Mountains of
Mirkwood attack the Woodland Realm. A power (the Ghost
of the Forest) moves with them, unseen but not undetected
by the Elves. If Thranduil is sick, then the enchantment of
the Elf-path is temporarily broken, and evil things flood
into the bower. Many Elves argue that they need the light
of the Lamp to defend the Woodland Realm.
The plague spawned in the depths of Dol Guldur grows,
and victims are reported as far north as the Carrock. So
far, the plague takes only the sick, the weak, and the very
old, but the Wise and the Elves fear a recurrence of the
great plague that hit the region in the year 1640.
Fearing the plague, the Master of Lake-town orders
that every foreigner and incoming ship be quarantined.
Warehouses and cottages are built on the other side of the
bridge that connects the city to the mainland, to house all
foreign goods, travellers and merchants for the period of
the quarantine. The townsfolk adopt the habit of burning
incense and other spices to ward off the evil breath of the
plague, raising alarmingly the danger of accidental fires.

94

Sanjar, the prince of Rhûn who the companions may
have helped in 2959 (see The Horselord’s Daughter) is the
target of an assassination attempt. Strange assassins from
the East, dusky-skinned Easterlings wielding poisoned
blades, attempt to murder Sanjar. Unless the companions
are able to stop the assassins, the young man perishes far
from home beneath the trees.
A son is born to Beorn. He calls him Grimbeorn.

Adventuring Phase:
Wheels within Wheels
While travelling in Western Mirkwood, or along the Old
Forest Road, the companions come upon the aftermath of
a battle. A dozen warriors lie among the trees, the victims
of an ambush by Orcs and Wargs. They slew more than
fifty Orcs before they perished. From the black liveries
worn by five archers among the dead, they came from
Dale.
Searching around reveals prints leading deeper into the
woods. When the companions follow these prints, they
find two of the Bardings trapped in a Spider-web, with
a big nasty Spider about feast on them. Once they save
them, the younger of the two thanks them and introduces

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

Bard resolved to send Bain and a group of chosen men
to investigate the origins of Girion in the Western Eaves
of Mirkwood. They travelled to Lake-town and found it
quarantined, so they took a boat down the River Running
to the end of the Long Marshes and tried to follow the
Old Forest Road to the land of the Woodmen. On the way,
they met a pair of Woodmen who offered their services as
guides – but they led the Bardings into a trap.

himself as no less than Bain son of Bard, Prince of Dale.
The other is old Ottarr, his personal counsellor and
bodyguard.

The Prince’s Tale
The prince is a handsome man of twenty years, with the
dark hair and build of his father, and the deep dark eyes
of his mother. He relates how he came to be trapped in
Mirkwood, so far from home.
Some years ago, a group of nobles in Dale started to
clamour for conquest and a show of strength from his
father, King Bard. They accused him of having abandoned
his loftier aims following the untimely death of his wife.
Last year, these nobles found their advocate in Girion, a
young man of seventeen claiming to be a direct descendant
of the last king of Dale before the Dragon came. This
young Girion bore a marked resemblance to his ancestors
indeed, and some of the nobles whispered that his claim
on the throne was superior to that of King Bard himself.

Blood Ties
Girion is the son of Valdis, or of her sister Valya,
if Valdis got killed in the adventure The Helm of
Peace. This makes him a direct descendant of Girion,

Lord of Dale, and a possible contender for the throne

currently occupied by King Bard, and destined for his
son Bain.

The Outlaws

Following advice from his council, Bard cautiously
welcomed Girion at court. The boy claimed openly that
his mother lived as an outlaw in the Western Eaves of
Mirkwood and that her dying wish was that he seek his
fortune in Dale. The townsfolk were overjoyed to have
another of the line of Girion in their city, especially as
’young Girion’ promised to be a skilled warrior and a
brave leader of men.

As Bain finishes his tale, the companions hear the
noise of several people approaching. They seem to be
following Bain’s trail, just like the company did. Those
with excellent hearing hear human voices muttering that
“he went this way” and “how did the bastard survive?” If
the companions react immediately, they may be able to
ambush the six outlaws; otherwise, the outlaws arrive in
the glen and immediately draw swords.

Last year, at Yuletide, something strange happened: the
boy was in the main square of Dale in front of the Royal
Palace, when a raven flew down, circled around him
three times, and then placed a branch torn from a beech
tree upon his sword-arm. Many read an omen in that,
indicating that young Girion would lead an army of Dale
against the cruel Elves – for, Prince Bain explains, many
of the young folk in Dale know nothing of the Woodland
Realm, save only wild tales and the recent troubles along
the border.

Two of the outlaws are the ’guides’ that tricked Bain into
an ambush. If the companions played through Honour
Among Thieves, they recognise some of the outlaws as
men who were in the outlaw band seven years ago.
The outlaws try to awkwardly bluff the company (“Prince
Bain! Thank fortune we found you alive! We assumed the
Orcs had… oh, sod it!”) before attacking (“Kill them all,
lads!”). Prince Bain is weakened and tired, and should not
be endangered in the fight (he is the future king of Dale!),
but Ottarr may help as his sword is sharp and his hand
is fell.

But King Bard was suspicious of this strange raven who
bore a branch, and he set spies to watch Girion. One of his
counsellors witnessed the young boy talking to that same
raven more than once – the bird seemed to be conveying
messages between him and someone in Mirkwood.

Once the battle is won, the companions may interrogate
the surviving outlaws. If the companions try to kill them
95

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

all, then Bain asks - or commands any Barding hero - to
spare one.

the Beacon Tower, but if they have just a small camp, then
the companions can easily sneak in.

•

There are one and half times as many outlaws as
companions if the company completed Geirbald’s last
request in 2962, or four times as many if Elfsigil rules the
entire band. How will the company deal with the outlaws?
Here are some suggestions.

•

•

•

The outlaws are part of a band led by Elfsigil (see
Honour Among Thieves). If the companions ensured
peace between the outlaws and the folk of Woodland
Hall, then the outlaw band is a small one that
splintered off from the main group. If the company
failed to accomplish Geirbald’s last wish, then the
cruel Elfsigil became the leader of the outlaws.
Their leader Elfsigil ordered them to find Prince Bain
and bring him to their camp north of the Old Forest
Road. He knew Prince Bain was coming because of
Elfsigil’s magic. Elfsigil can “talk to the birds” and is
visited by “black wizards”. From the description, the
company can at least tell that the bird is Eágbitar, the
raven associated with Valdis.
The Orcs seemed to be lying in wait. The outlaws
fled as soon as the first Orcs attacked. They were not
the usual Orcs of Mirkwood; they were “big, dark
bastards” in heavy armour and wielding ugly axes.
If asked about Valdis, the outlaws shrug. They
remember Valdis well. Elfsigil did everything she told
him to do, and everyone knew that she was really
running the outlaws. She vanished about a year ago,
taking with her half their treasure and some of their
best fighters. Elfsigil did not seem to care too much,
and most of the outlaws assumed that he got tired of
the old harridan and moved on to a younger wench.

Prince Bain asks the companions to help him find and
possibly capture Elfsigil. He will reward them well once he
returns to Dale.

The Lair of the Outlaws
If the companions cleared the Old Forest Road over
the course of the campaign, then the outlaws’ lair is a
poorly-defended camp on the edge of Western Mirkwood.
However, if they have not cleared the road, then the
outlaws have occupied and fortified the Beacon Tower on
the Haunted Hills (Heart of the Wild, page 89), making
attacking them a much more difficult prospect. The
description below assumes the outlaws are residence in
96

•

Sneaking In: The company can try sneaking past the
outlaws with Stealth. Elfsigil’s quarters are high atop
the Beacon Tower, which can be reached only by a
narrow spiral staircase that is easy to defend.

•

The Secret Passage: If the companions have a Dwarf
in their number, they can find the entrance to the
Spider-haunted tin mines and stone quarries nearby,
and from there find a concealed entrance into the
cellars of the tower.

•

Besieging the Tower: The Beacon Tower is far from
the domains of Men, but within the reach of the
Beornings or the Woodmen of Woodland Hall. If the
company call in allies, they can besiege the tower and
take it by force of arms.

•

Calling Elfsigil Out: Elfsigil rules the outlaws by
force of personality. Should a champion challenge him
(with a successful Awe roll in front of the outlaws),
Elfsigil will have to come out and speak with them or
else risk looking weak.

The Messenger
Elfsigil is not alone in the camp – the Messenger of
Mordor is there when the company arrives. The Nazgûl
leaves as soon as the company’s presence is detected.
The characters may only catch a glimpse of a hooded
horsemen on a black steed, or be scattered by a wave
of unreasoning fear when the Ringwraith rides out, but
there can be little doubt that Elfsigil is in league with Dol
Guldur.

Elfsigil
The outlaw chieftain scornfully dismisses the company
when he meets them. Valdis, he claims, is gone and good
riddance to her. He does not know where she is, nor does

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

he care. Insight confirms that he is lying – he is still
serving Valdis, and still in love with the older woman. If
challenged, he fights to the death.

side of Mirkwood so they can ’threaten’ the traders and
merchants, and then her son can ’defeat’ them, winning
glory without peril.

The Letters

But there is an even darker side to Valdis’ plans. For
Girion to become king without civil war, she needs to kill
King Bard. The Messenger of Mordor sent her to find a
dark treasure in the Mountains of Mirkwood. There,
amid the ruins and the twisted trees, she found what she
sought – the Hame of the Great Vampire. Following the
advice of the Ringwraith, Valdis wore the enchanted skin
and discovered she could turn into a vampire-bat. The old
schemer then used the hame to fly into the heart of Dale
and start sucking blood from King Bard in his sleep. His
plague is nothing of the sort; it is Valdis who is draining
his body and spirit night after night.

Searching Elfsigil’s chamber reveals several letters,
carried south by Eágbitar. They reveal that Valdis went
north to the Mountains of Mirkwood to seek some
’treasure’ that would be of great benefit to her son’s
ambitions. She communicates with her son and Elfsigil
using her raven, Eágbitar. Valdis is somewhere in the
Mountains. She commanded Elfsigil to gather more
outlaws and move to the Long Marshes, where she will
give him further commands.

News from Dale
While the company and Bain are in Mirkwood, word
comes from Dale (by way of the raven of a companion, for
example): the plague has come to the north. While there
have been only a few victims so far, it is widely reported
that King Bard has fallen terribly ill. The King is alive, but
he is too weak to leave his sickbed.

The company may thwart Valdis’ schemes in the
adventure The Hame of the Vampire (page 104).

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

Furthermore, everyone believes that Prince Bain perished
in the forest along with his guards (one of Valdis’s
agents brought news of the Orc attack back soon after
it happened). With the King sick and his heir dead or
missing, the hearts of the people of Dale turn to another
hero of the line of kings of old – young Girion is not yet
acclaimed as heir-designate, but many in Dale look to him
to lead them in these dark times.

The company may help Prince Bain find a provisional
home in the Vales of Anduin or in the Western Eaves
of Mirkwood. Ottarr counsels Prince Bain to adopt a
different name and identity for the time being, as the
dispute between Bain and Girion promises to be difficult
to solve.

Year 2970

Prince Bain receives the news with grief and would return
to Dale immediately, but wise Ottarr counsels him not to
act rashly: with his father sick, only Prince Bain prevents
the nobles who oppose King Bard from putting young
Girion on the throne - a nuisance that can be easily
remedied by men without scruples. Ottarr fears for the life
of his prince, and counsels him to look for allies here in
Mirkwood to support him when he returns.

Events
If King Thranduil fell victim of the poison of the traitor
Halbrech the Wineseller (see page 130) he finally wakes
up in the spring of this year. The Elvenking appears as if
he fully recovered in mind and body, but the dark dreams
he experienced while locked in his unnatural sleep have
tainted his spirit; Thranduil becomes sympathetic with
the views of the Wayward Elves, and his first command
is to expel all foreigners residing in the Woodland Realm
(Thranduil’s Halls cannot be considered a sanctuary by
companions any more).

The Dark Schemes of Valdis
Part of Valdis’ scheme is obvious. She gained allies in Dale
in a group of wealthy nobles who want more power, and
they support her son Girion as he has a good claim to the
throne. She also intends to move the outlaws to the eastern
97

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The children stolen by the Wayward Elves (see Year 2958,
page 50) return, greatly changed by the experience (and
twelve years older). The children appear wise and skilled
beyond their years, and there is something bright and
strange in their eyes. These ‘changelings’, as they come
to be known, return to their old homes, but are now
committed allies of the Elves. Some do not welcome their
return, and fear the children as they fear the wilder folk of
the woods (see also the Changeling Characters box).

Prince Bain of Dale has not returned from his journey into
Mirkwood and the realm is ruled by a council of regents,
as King Bard is sick. Rumours say that Bain was slain by
outlaws in Mirkwood, while others claim that the prince
escaped and is now living in the woods.
The plague strikes the very heart of the Beornings when
Beorn’s infant son shows signs of illness. Beorn sends the
child to Radagast for healing.

Changeling Characters
A player who wants to retire an active Barding
character by this time may wish to play one of the
Changelings. Changeling companions are allowed to
pick a Reward (should they wish to start with one)

choosing from the Cultural Rewards available to

the Elves of Mirkwood. Changelings begin the game

with the same starting skill scores and Specialities as
Elves of Mirkwood.

Changelings also use a special Background: Stolen by
the Elves

You wandered into the enchanted land of the Elves

as a young child, and grew up under their care and
tutelage. They delighted in your mortal innocence

and wonder, and taught you the ways of the Elves.

Now, you have returned to the mortal realm, but you
remember with fondness the teachings of your fosterparents. You are a child of the twilight, halfway

between the starry night of the Elves and the harsh
day of the Edain.

The horrors of the plague are seen elsewhere in Mirkwood.
Many flee human contact, risking the perils of the wood
rather than fall victim to the disease. Strangely, the plague
spares Woodmen-town. Rumours quickly spread that the
light of the Lamp of Balthi protects against the plague.
Many travel from Woodman Hall, Rhosgobel and other
places in Mirkwood to find sanctuary close to the healing
light of the Lamp.

Basic Attributes: (choose a set of Basic

Attributes from those available to the Bardings)
Favoured Skill: Stealth
Distinctive Features:

Woodmen fleeing their homes make themselves vulnerable
to the Werewolf of Mirkwood. This horror stalks the
Western Eaves this year, and more victims than ever fall
prey to its teeth and claws.
98

(choose two from those listed)

Cautious, Cunning, Fair-spoken, Lordly, Merciful,
Patient, Proud, Wary.

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

Adventuring Phase:
Slaying the Forest Dragon

The Forest Dragon:

The Forest Dragon (Heart of the Wild, page 71) awoke
from her slumber ten years ago. The gloomy barrens of
Northern Mirkwood offer little in the way of sustenance,
so she turns her heavy-lidded gaze west to the fertile vales
of Anduin and the lands of the Beornings.
In the middle of spring she reaches the eaves of Mirkwood,
and falls upon the defenders of the Forest Gate with savage
fury. Three gulps of her monstrous jaws, and the Elves
who watch the gate are gone. From there, she slithers west
again, and devours a herd of cattle before crawling back
into the woods.

Attribute Level
8

Endurance

Hate

99

10

Parry

Armour

6

4d/1d*

Skills
Personality, 3
Movement, 4

Custom, 2

Perception, 5

Vocation, 3

Weapon Skills

Both Beorn and the Elvenking call for heroes to seek out
and slay the Dragon.

Hunting the Forest Dragon
The Forest Dragon is canny and wood-wise. For a creature
so big, she is surprisingly stealthy, and her green-black
hide hides her in the darkness of the forest. It is relatively
simple to find her trail, but as soon as the Dragon realises
she is being followed, she likes to turn around and lay a
trap for her pursuers. She might slither up into the treetops and drop down on them from above, sink her long
body into a river and watch them like a crocodile or just
lurk in the shadows and ambush them.
The best way to catch her is to lure her out with food, for
the Forest Dragon is half-starved. She would devour all
the lands of the Beornings if she dared – but she is not
ready yet to challenge Beorn. If the companions lay a trap
with a few fat cows, then sooner or later the Dragon will
come to them.

Fighting the Forest Dragon
The Forest Dragon is a Long-worm, a Wingless Dragon
of the line of Scatha, lesser in stature than Smaug the
Golden, but still a terrible threat to the Free Peoples.
In combat, the Forest Dragon targets her strongest foes
with her Dreadful Spells, preferably from a distance.
She avoids fighting outside of the forest, to exploit her
Mirkwood-dweller ability to her best advantage.
99

Survival, 4

Bite

3

Crush

3

Special Abilities
Great Size

Dreadful Spells*

Thick Hide

Weak Spot**

Horrible Strength

Mirkwood-dweller

Thing of Terror

Weapons:
Weapon

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

Bite

9

9

20

Pierce

Crush

14

C

16

-

type

Notes
Bite: Long-worms have very short limbs, in comparison
to their long, sinuous bodies. Their fangs compensate
for their lack of claws, though, as their bite can crunch
through steel or marble.
Crush: The Forest Dragon whips her tail around her
enemies and crush them tightening her coils.

*Dragon-spell: During combat, reduce the Dragon’s Hate
point score by one to force one companion who is within
her baleful gaze to make a Corruption check against TN
14. Those who get a extraordinary success shake off the
spell and may act normally. A great success means the
character is frozen and unable to act for one round. Those
who merely succeed are frozen for another three rounds.
Those who fail are frozen indefinitely, locked into their
stiffened flesh like living statues until they die of thirst.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Perhaps the healing powers of a Wizard might lift this
spell; slaying the Forest Dragon also frees her victims.
Mirkwood-dweller: While the creature fights inside
Mirkwood its Parry score is doubled.
**Weak Spot: It is said that it is the doom of all Dragonkind that regardless of how hard is their armoured skin to
pierce, below they have the soft belly of a snake. Whenever
the Forest Dragon attempts a Called shot or spends a
point of Hate to use a special ability (Horrible Strength
or Dreadful Spells) she exposes her Weak Spot for enough
time for the companions to hit it with their next attack.
When hit for a Piercing Blow on her weak spot, the Forest
Dragon rolls only one die for her Protection test.

The Hoard

area; survivors of that folk may still be living in the forest
and know where the Forest Dragon made her lair. If the
companions are able to locate where the Forest Dragon
slept (Heart of the Wild, page 71), then they may find her
treasure hoard – it is not as fabulous as the wonderful
treasure of Smaug, but it is worth a king’s ransom in these
fallen days. The hoard consists of some 250 Treasure,
including a few notable objects:
•

The Torc of Fram: A treasure of the ancestors of
Rohan, this torc of gold with garnets was looted from
the ruins of a town in the Vales of Gundabad where
that folk dwelt for a time. The torc gives anyone who
wears it the Lordly Distinctive trait.

•

The Cup of Kinship: Another treasure from the Vales
of Anduin, it is said that those who drink from
this golden cup are forever bound together in true
friendship. If everyone in the company drinks from
the cup, the company’s Fellowship rating is raised by
3 points. This bond can be renewed once every year.

The death of a Dragon never fails to attracts thieves and
treasure-hunters, as the fell beast must have had a hoard
hidden somewhere! The curse of Dragon-gold is strong
indeed in such dark times…
If the exiled Dwarves of Northern Mirkwood are still
around (in other words, if the Greydelve was never
reclaimed), then they covet the hoard and try to steal it.
No one seems to have a clue to where the treasure might
lie undisturbed. The Viglundings used to live around the

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
The passing of a Dragon brings always good fortune – all
rolls made for the upkeep of a holding are modified by a
-2 this year.

100

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

Year 2971

These were folk who fled Black Tarn Hall and came to
Rhosgobel seeking healing, but the Werewolf caught them
before they could find sanctuary. The beast’s attacks must
be stopped.

Events
The plague continues to spread throughout Mirkwood.
Villagers abandon Black Tarn Hall, which suffered greatly
from the wasting sickness, and make for the healing light
of the Lamp of Balthi. Others leave Mirkwood altogether,
and seek shelter at Mountain Hall or with the Beornings.
More evil creatures come down from the Mountains of
Mirkwood to trouble the Elves. Spiders, Vampires, Wargs
and Orcs trespass within thirty miles of the Halls of
Thranduil.
To defend his Realm, the Elvenking causes the Enchanted
Stream to follow a new course. The stream now doesn’t
cross the Elf-path any more, but flows north-west to the
south following the track, until it plunges over a new
waterfall near the gates of Thranduil’s Halls.

The Nature of the Beast
Ever since the year 2965 (see the adventure The Theft of
the Lamp) Radagast has wondered about the connection
between the Werewolf of Mirkwood and the Lamp of
Balthi. The Lamp is the one power in Mirkwood that the
Werewolf cannot endure, but it is not strong enough to
destroy it.
By now, Radagast (and possibly the companions) have
realised that the Werewolf of Mirkwood cannot be defeated
normally, as the evil spirit that inhabits its physical body
can abandon it to escape destruction, only to later possess
another Warg or wolf and turn it into another monstrous
Werewolf. These days, the Werewolf rules a huge pack of
Wargs and is never seen alone.

Prince Bain sends messengers to Dale from his exile to
reveal that he is alive and well, and meaning to return
soon. Some time later he takes the road, but must
abandon his plans when assassins try to kill him. He is
saved by faithful Ottarr, who is grievously wounded but
survives.

Radagast believes that the only way to permanently defeat
the Werewolf is to prevent the spirit from fleeing the
uncovered light of the Lamp (the companions may have
come to the same conclusions by themselves).

In the meantime in Dale, young Girion accuses Prince
Bain of having betrayed and deserted his own folk. More
and more nobles flock to support his cause. King Bard
remains bedridden and afflicted with the plague.

•

Fight the Werewolf of Mirkwood and slay it, making
sure that there are no wolves or Wargs nearby for the
spirit to flee into;

•

Shine the Lamp of Balthi onto the disembodied spirit,
and hold it there until it is burnt away to nothing but
a fleeting shade of its former strength.

Adventuring Phase:
The Dying of the Light

To do this, the company must:

Planning the Trap

Radagast summons the company to Rhosgobel. Refugees
from all over the Western Eaves of Mirkwood crowd into
the small sheltered enclave within the hedge, and the
Wizard does his best to care for them. His face is careworn,
his eyes haunted by the sight of so much suffering. He
shows the company to another, equally horrific sight. In a
mass grave outside Rhosgobel are many recent victims of
the Werewolf of Mirkwood.

There are four distinct challenges that the company must
overcome to finally defeat the Werewolf of Mirkwood.

Travel to Woodmen-town
In better days, the company could cross to the Dusky River
and take a boat, or make their way along the relatively
safe woods of the Western Eaves. Now, any travel risks
attack from the Werewolf or Spiders.

101

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Get the Lamp
The Lamp of Balthi is a cherished relic of the folk of
Woodmen-town, and they believe it is their only shelter
from the threat of the plague. Persuading them to give it
up, even only for a short time and even with Radagast’s
blessing, will not be easy. The company may have to swear
that they will protect the Lamp, or even steal the Lamp out
of the hall in order to use it against the Werewolf.

Lure the Werewolf
The Werewolf hates the Lamp of Balthi more than anything
else in Arda – but it is no fool, and will not charge into
Woodmen-town blindly. The company need to find a way
to lure the Werewolf into a trap. Some possibilities:
•

Bring the Lamp to the Werewolf’s lair in the Mountains
of Mirkwood.

•

Take the Lamp out of Woodmen-town and use it as
bait.

•

Go and track the Werewolf down in the deep forest.

Hound succeeds admirably – all the Wargs and wolves
chase the Hound howling into the depths of Mirkwood –
but the Hound never returns.

The Death of the Beast
To defeat the Werewolf of Mirkwood once and for all
the company must first wound it and reduce it to zero
Endurance; no other wolves must be around, and the
Lamp of Balthi must be uncovered and its light made to
shine on the Werewolf.
If these conditions are acquired, then the spirit residing
inside the dying wolf-body will attempt to leave it, but will
be burned by the ancient radiance of the Lamp, never to
be seen or heard of in this age of the world again.
The Lamp also provides some benefits in battle:
•

The uncovered Lamp inflicts all enemies a loss of
Hate points equal to the roll of two Success dice (the
Loremaster assigns the Hate points loss in any way he
sees fit). It also gives them all the Craven trait, so any
enemy reduced to 0 Hate flees.

•

A character who attempts the Intimidate Foe task
while the Lamp is shining gets a bonus of +6 to his
Awe or Battle roll, and triples any Hate point loss
generated.

Deal with the Pack
The Werewolf of Mirkwood runs at the head of a pack of
more than a hundred wolves. The company must find a
way to drive these beasts away, lure them away from the
Werewolf or else kill them all first before engaging the
beast itself. Ideally, the company can call for help a patron
or ally.
•

Beorn or Radagast can speak to the animals, and
could whistle up a herd of deer to lure the wolves
away;

•

Saruman the White, should the company call on him,
is a Wizard of great power and authority. He alone
has the strength to stop the Werewolf from fleeing into
the body of another wolf. If the company can slay the
Werewolf once in his presence, he can hold the spirit
while they bring the Lamp to bear;

If a companion has been entrusted with a Hound of the
West, then the faithful beast speaks up and volunteers
to drive away the wolves. If entrusted with the task, the

Unexpected Complications
This is to be the final confrontation with the Werewolf
of Mirkwood, and the company’s last chance to slay
the beast forever. The Loremaster must let the heroes
drive the battle, adapting his description to reflect their
preparations and their planned trap.
However, things should never go as expected, and the
Loremaster may include one or more complications and
twists to the battle…

Treachery of the Woodmen
If Ceawin is still in the thrall of a Wight, or if Mogdred
is still alive, then they may interfere with the final battle.
Alternatively, well-meaning but foolish Woodmen may
try to take the Lamp back from the ’thieves’. Choose this

102

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

complication for groups who have a long association with
the Woodmen and their internal politics.

The Nazgûl Strikes
The Werewolf is a valuable weapon to the Enemy, and the
Lieutenant of Dol Guldur will not let it be destroyed so
easily. This option works best for players who enjoy nighimpossible odds!

only shelter it can find – the body of a companion! The
character must immediately make a Corruption test, at a
TN of 14 + the character’s Shadow rating.
•

If the test fails, then the body of the companion is
seized by the Werewolf of Mirkwood and the only
thing to free the world from this bane is to kill both
hero and monster! Should a companion let himself be
killed (or even kill himself!) his demise would count as
a Heroic Death (Loremaster’s Guide, page 121).

•

If the test succeeds, the character is able to imprison
the Werewolf within his own flesh. The character is
now a skinchanger and can turn into a wolf! (See
The Curse of the Werewolf box. Moreover, this is an
excellent lead-in to the adventure Beorn’s Quest - see
page 111).

The Werewolf’s Hostage
Before the trap is sprung, the Werewolf captures someone
dear to one of the companions. In a snarling, bestial
tongue, it offers to exchange its hostage for the Lamp.
Refuse, and the hostage dies. Choose this option for
characters who have made their home in Mirkwood.

The Beast Within
Burned and scarred by the Light of the Lamp, and denied
the body of a wolf to inhabit, the spirit leaps into the

The Curse of the Werewolf
A

companion

inhabited

by

the

Werewolf

of

Mirkwood

immediately gains five Shadow points, as his spirit is consumed
by the unquenchable hunger of the evil spirit. The curse lets the

hero turn into a wolf of prodigious size at will (see the Werewolf’s
abilities below) but the companion must pass a Corruption test

against TN 18 during every Fellowship phase or gain another
Shadow point.

Special Abilities

Rending Jaws: The companion in wolf-form can make attacks

using his primary weapon’s skill score and using the following
stats: Damage 8, Edge 10, Injury 16.

Toughness: The companion may spend a point of Hope to reduce
his Endurance loss caused by the attack of an opponent by a
number of points equal to his favoured Body score.
Terrible Strength: Following a successful attack, the companion
may spend a point of Hope to increase the target’s Endurance loss
by a number of points equal to his favoured Body score.

103

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Year 2972

Pity Stays Your Hand
The dying beast pleads for the company to shroud the
Lamp. It is dying, but the Lamp will burn its spirit and
make it suffer as it passes. If they shroud the Lamp, it can
die easily. The companions may suspect that the Werewolf
is lying, but this is exactly what it seems – an opportunity
to show pity. The spirit was not always evil, but the Dark
Powers corrupted it into something monstrous. However,
vengeful companions may wish to see the beast pay for all
its crimes.

Aftermath
If the companions fail to destroy the Werewolf, then it
continues to prey on the unfortunate Woodmen. Travel
between the various settlements becomes virtually
impossible. The Woodmen Houses must each stand alone
against the darkness.
If they succeed, the Woodmen are initially suspicious of
tales that speak of the defeat of the Werewolf of Mirkwood
– other hunters have claimed the beast was dead, only to
be proved wrong. However, as the nights roll by and there
is no sign of the wolf reborn, the folk of Woodmen-town
realise that the beast is finally gone. The shadow of the
plague still hangs over them, but that day the companions
are hailed as heroes.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

Events
The death of the Werewolf of Mirkwood is marked by
feasts and celebration from Northern Mirkwood to the
Black Tarn.
King Bard continues to grow weaker, and many in Dale
openly discuss the succession of Girion to the throne.

Adventuring Phase:
The Hame of the Vampire
Several years ago, the outlaw Valdis went into the
Mountains of Mirkwood in search of a relic that could
further her son’s ambitions. Guided by the whispered
malice of the Ringwraiths of Dol Guldur, she found an
entrance into the labyrinth of tunnels and caves beneath
the dark hills. And there, in some lightless chasm, she
found what she sought.
There are several ways for the companions to become
involved in this quest:
•

If they played the adventure Wheels Within Wheels
(page 94), then they know from Elfsigil that his mistress
is somewhere in the Mountains of Mirkwood. Finding
someone in the wilderness is no easy matter, but after
several weeks of cold trails and false starts, they spot
Eágbitar and follow the bird into the caves.

•

Alternatively, they might be contacted by Thranduil.
The Elvenking believes that the recent spate of Vampire
attacks in the Woodland Realm are planned and
directed by a single dread will. He sends the company
into the mountains, telling them to retrace the path he
himself walked many years ago.

•

Finally, a companion in Dale might see the monster
that is haunting King Bard, and track the Vampire to
the Mountains of Mirkwood.

Companions who took part in the slaying of the Werewolf
of Mirkwood and who do not belong to the Woodmen
may choose to Receive Title (Hero of the Woodmen)
undertaking this year (see page 83).

B
104

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

The Shadow of the Mountain
The journey into the Mountains of Mirkwood takes the
company through some of the most dangerous terrain
in the whole forest. The land is cracked and tortured,
resulting in many hidden chasms and ravines. The trees
cluster dark and thick together, so a traveller might not
see a cliff-edge or some other hazard until he falls over
it. The Mountains of Mirkwood are a blighted land, so
the Loremaster should call for Corruption tests as the
companions make their way through the wilderness.
In time, the companions come to the Elven ruins of the
Refuge. White marble pillars jut like dry bones out from
the black earth, and collapsed buildings stare with holloweyed windows at the intruders. The Refuge was despoiled
long ago, and there may be Orcs lurking in wait here.
This is where Thranduil’s path began when he quested to
destroy the Great Vampire (Heart of the Wild, page 88).

The Path of Song
Any companion with Song ♦♦ or Elven-lore knows the
‘Lay of Thranduil & the Vampire’, although mortals have
long since forgotten the King’s name and now refer to it
as ’The Ballad of the Green Prince and the Red Queen’.
The middle section of the song describes how to find the
entrance used by Thranduil.

All crowned with mist the twisted peak
Stood proud of its brethren, grey and bleak.
Forth the hunters, brave and bold
Nine there were, yet ‘twas foretold.
That one alone would climb back down
They did not shirk the oath they’d sworn.
But climbed the hills through fir and thorn
the sun their herald that first morn.
Three days they walked, and fought and bled
horrors uncounted behind them tread.
Until at last they found the Gate
Morgoth’s maw, that pit of hate.
Noisome vapours rose from the gulf
at last the prince said “hold, enough!
Our foe is near, we’ve found her lair.”
And from the deeps, the foetid air
Became a deathly pall, a hame of night
And darkness took him from our sight.

If the companions follow the words of the song, they know
how to find the chasm. Travel three days east from the
Refuge, look for a twisted peak with bare sides that is
reached through a forest of fir and thorn, and then find a
black chasm. The journey is unpleasant and perilous, but
at least it is swift.
If the company do not follow the song, then they must
Explore to find traces of the Vampire. The TN for these
Explore tests is TN 18, and one test may be made every
three days.

Into the Chasm
The trail ends at the lip of a deep chasm, a gaping cleft in
the flank of the mountain. There is no easy path down.
The only way to enter the chasm is to climb down. The
walls of the chasm are thronged with thousands of bats.
If the companions climb down slowly and carefully, taking
every necessary precaution, the task won’t require them to
make any roll. The companions face three very different
threats instead:
•

Flocks of Vampire Bats: A huge swarm of Great Bats
(see page 85 of the Loremaster’s Guide) flap out of
the darkness and attack the companions. There are
three bats per companion. Climbing companions are
considered to be severely hindered both attacking and
defending (TN modified by +4/-4 respectively). They
also cannot assume a Rearward stance.

•

Noisome Vapours: A cloud of sulphurous smoke
rises from some hellish fire far below. This strange
smoke makes the companions feel light-headed and
uncertain, and causes them to make a Corruption test
at TN 18. Those who fail gain 3 Shadow points.

•

Any companion made Miserable by the smoke falls
under the influence of the Great Vampire (see page
88).

•

Outlaws: Several outlaws accompanied Valdis into the
Mountains, but only three of them survive to this day.
They attack the company as they make the final stage
of their descent into the chasm. The three outlaws
are deathly pale, rake-thin and obviously crazed.

105

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

They have seen horrors they dare not remember,
and survived by eating bats, lizards and their former
comrades. They serve Valdis out of terror, not loyalty;
if the companions spare them, or convince them to
surrender, then they will guide the company through
the caves to the vampire’s lair.

An Ancient Shadow Reborn
Valdis found what she sought: the remains of the Great
Vampire (Heart of the Wild, page 88). Through vile arts
taught to her by the Messenger of Mordor and with the
aid of the hungry shade of the Vampire itself, she was able
to take the dreadful bat-fell of the creature and drape it
around her own body as a cloak. But she didn’t obtain the
result she was looking for: she became the Great Vampire
itself, reborn with the lesser evil of her sinful soul merging
with the dark spirit of the monster.
All the Vampires of Mirkwood bowed before their new
queen, and at the urging of the Nazgûl she sent them
north to attack the Elves.
Valdis herself flapped north to Dale to pursue her dark
agenda. In the dead of night she crept into the bedchambers
of King Bard and started to feed on his blood. She has been
haunting the King since that night, taking just enough to
keep him weak and sick, but not enough to kill him; she

knows she must wait for her son Girion to reinforce his
claim to the throne.
For the last year or more, Valdis travelled back and forth
between Dale and the Mountains of Mirkwood. Each time
she visited Bard, she left him weaker and less able to rule.
By her magic, she avoided his guards, and his physicians
were puzzled by the king’s continuing weakness.
Little of her humanity remains. She is wedded to the
darkness as surely as any Ringwraith, but she deludes
herself that one day she will cast off the Vampire’s hame and
enter Dale as a queen, or at least as the mother of a king.

The Lair of the Vampire
Valdis makes her lair in the huge cavern once used by the
Great Vampire. This cathedral of black stone has many
bottomless pits and cracks in its floor, so only a flying
creature can easily cross from one side to another. Those
who cannot take to the air must follow more circuitous
routes across the chamber. The ceiling is more than thirty
feet high in places, and hundreds of bats nest there.
There is, of course, no light in the cave, and anyone who
brings in so much as a candle is smothered by the bats.
Valdis’s throne – she no longer sleeps – is in the centre of
the cavern.

106

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

The Great Vampire

Orcs and Vampires and all manner of frightful things.
She will spare them… for a price.

Valdis may appear in any of three forms.
First, there is her true shape: an old woman, once comely
maybe, but now bent and haggard with long years in
the wilderness, wearing only the vile skin of a long-dead
Giant Bat draped around her filthy shoulders. Gobbets
of dried blood stain her mouth and sagging breasts, and
she fumbles blearily amid the bat droppings with sightless
eyes. If the company can sneak into the cavern without
making a sound or using any light, this is the form they
see.

Battling Valdis
In addition to Valdis herself, there are uncountable Great
Bats, Goblin Archers and Orc Soldiers in the caverns.
As soon as fighting starts, these minions flood into the
chamber. The company can use the terrain to their
advantage by moving to one of the rocky ’islands’, but that
also risks cutting off their line of retreat.

The Great Vampire:

Second, she can shroud herself in a magical illusion. In
this form, she becomes both beautiful and terrible, a dark
queen of the night, young and seductive, to be desired
and feared in equal measure. If Valdis knows that the
companions are coming, she may take on this form and
try to seduce one of them (especially if they are Miserable
because of the vapours, and therefore vulnerable to her
influence). She may also use this form to bargain with the
company.

Attribute Level
7

Hate

70

12

Parry

Armour

9

3d

Skills
Personality, 3
Movement, 5
Perception, 4

Third, she can become a huge vampire bat, more vicious
than any the companions have yet faced. This is the form
she uses when flying to Dale.

Survival, 3
Custom, 2
Vocation, 1

Weapon Skills
Rake
Bite

4
4

Special Abilities

Encountering the Vampire
Instead of attacking as soon as the companions show
themselves, Valdis prefers to speak with them. She is a
reasonable monster – her plans are nearly complete, and
she intends to leave this place for Dale within the year so she won’t take any unnecessary risks. Valdis may try
gambits like the following:
•

Valdis offers to withdraw her Vampires from the
Woodland Realm, if Thranduil recognises her as
Queen of the Mountains of Mirkwood.

•

She might promise to lift her curse from King Bard,
if her son is named heir to the kingdom of Dale.
She claims that young Girion knows nothing of her
machinations on his behalf.

•

Endurance

Hate Sunlight
Snake-like Speed
Savage Assault
Enthral

Denizen of the Dark
Fell Speed
Bewilder
Great Size

Enthral: Miserable companions count as automatically
Enthralled by the Great Vampire. The Great Vampire
steals up to 3 points of Hope from an Enthralled victim
each round. Hope points stolen in this fashion are added
to the Vampire’s Hate score.

Weapons:

She may point out that the companions are in her
stronghold, far from the light, and that she commands
107

Weapon

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

Bite

7

C

16

Pierce

Rake

7

C

14

-

type

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Valdis flees if reduced to 0 Endurance, or if wounded and
reduced to half her starting Endurance. She flaps towards
the exit at the southern edge of the cavern. Should the
companions pursue her through the maze of tunnels and
passageways, they arrive at another cave-mouth high
above Mirkwood just in time to see a huge bat-winged
shape flapping away into the night. The companions
should be content with surviving the encounter and return
home with precious information. Valdis flees north to
Dale and her son. She may be encountered again in 2973,
in the adventure The Reach of the Shadow.

mound. A lord of Dale named Orlmond built his castle
there and today it is a mighty fortress by the standards of
the North, with Dwarf-wrought gates and high towers, for
Orlmond is a wealthy man.
Orlmond’s role in this adventure depends on the current
state of Dale, and the nature of the company:
•

If the company aided Prince Bain and helped him to
force young Girion out of Dale, then Orlmond is an
ally of Girion, one of the greedy lords whose ambition
led them to oppose King Bard and support Girion in
the first place. Recently, Orlmond sent a message to
Prince Bain, inviting him to feast in his castle and to
hunt in Mirkwood, so they could discuss their recent
differences. This offer was a trap – Girion and his men
were waiting for Bain, and now he is a prisoner in the
castle.

•

Conversely, if Prince Bain is still in exile somewhere
in Wilderland, then Orlmond is one of his few allies.
Orlmond has long been a friend of the Elves. Prince
Bain went to visit Orlmond, but while he was at the
castle, it was attacked by Girion’s men. The castle was
taken by treachery, and now Bain is a prisoner in the
castle, while Orlmond is a hostage in his own home –
Girion hopes that Orlmond will switch sides.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Nothing of note.

Year 2973
Events
The worst of the plague is past. While some fall ill this
winter, there are few new outbreaks. Most of those who
are still alive are immune to the disease.
The preciptious fall in the numbers of Woodmen means
that they are now too few to sustain all their settlements.
Some leave their homes and travel to larger communities
like Woodmen-town; others vanish into the forest.
Bofri and the other Dwarves who came south to open the
Old Forest Road are found dead in one of their waystations.
From the signs, it seems that they were attacked by bandits
or warriors from Dol Guldur.
The quarrels between Prince Bain and young Girion
continue. While it has not yet come to open war, the two
continue to gather allies.

Adventuring Phase:
the Reach of the Shadow
In the Northern Dalelands just beyond the eastern edge
of Mirkwood, north of the River Running, lies a tall green

So, either way, Prince Bain is a prisoner in the castle of
Orlmond, and must be rescued. Prince Bain’s squire,
faithful Ottarr, escaped the castle and went in search of
help.

The Plight of the Prince
Ottarr seeks out the companions and tells them that
Prince Bain is imprisoned in Orlmond Castle. He begs for
their help in rescuing his master from young Girion.
Companions wise in the matters of politics and diplomacy
understand the dilemma: if Girion’s imprisonment of the
prince becomes public knowledge – say, if Ottarr brought
word to Dale itself – then it would certainly lead to open
conflict between Bain’s supporters and Girion’s men. If
the company can rescue Bain quietly, then it will avoid a
civil war.

108

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

Castle Orlmond
Castle Orlmond is a new fortification, consisting of a tall
central keep surrounded by a stone wall. Another wooden
wall encompasses a larger bailey-yard in front of the
keep. The steep-sided mound is the castle’s best defence,
especially as the moat at the base of the mound is filled
with black, leech-ridden mud and sharp stones.

The castle is guarded by some thirty warriors, all loyal to
Girion. Many of the cottagers and foresters in the land
nearby support him, so Girion can call hundreds more men
to his banner if he is attacked openly. If that wasn’t enough,
the pretender has also brought a number of mercenaries
from the East with him. Young Girion and Orlmond are
of course there too. Finally, if the company failed to slay
Girion’s mother Valdis in the adventure The Hame of the
Vampire (page 104), then she too is in the castle.

Prince Bain and his surviving companions are imprisoned
in the dungeons of the keep.

Sneaking into the Castle
There are three possible routes for entering the castle:
•

Through the front gate: The company could just
try walking in, either in disguise (as wandering
mercenaries or minstrels), or brazenly as themselves,
feigning that they know nothing of Orlmond’s
imprisonment of Prince Bain. Convicing Orlmond
to let them in requires Courtesy or Awe, based on
whether Orlmond is a prisoner himself or not.

•

Over the walls: A good burglar could climb over
the wooden outer wall easily, sneak up through the
outbuildings and sheds in the bailey, then find a way
over the sturdy inner wall and from there into the
keep. Doing so requires Stealth.

•

The gutter stream: A stream of water – black with filth
and waste from the castle kitchens – runs down the
steep western side of the mound. An adventurous
thief with a strong stomach could climb up this steep,
stony gutter and somehow find a way through the
iron grating where it runs under the outer stone wall.
From there, they can follow the stream into the keep
via a narrow tunnel. Climbing up the gutter stream is
a test of Athletics.

Once in the keep, the companions must find a way down
into the dungeon. The only door is locked, and the key
kept by Orlmond. Furthermore, the door is guarded by
a ferocious hound, a beast kept by Girion that savagely

Honeyed Words
Should the companions meet young Girion, the pretender tries to woo them to his cause. Girion certainly looks the

part – the handsome hero might be a marble statue brought to life or a champion who leapt from the pages of a saga

of old. He speaks of the potential greatness of Dale, how all the North can be brought together in a single kingdom
like in the days of old, when all Rhovanion was one. He claims that he does not wish to steal King Bard’s throne,

but Bard’s claim to kingship rests on a single bow-shot, nothing more. There is still time to restore the ancient line,

the true line of Girion. Those who support him, he hints, will be well rewarded with land and gold and titles when he
is king.

109

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

attacks any intruders. Getting past the hound without
raising the alarm is almost impossible – an Elf with the
gift of the Speakers might be able to soothe the beast with
Song, a Woodman who keeps her own hound might know
enough Beast-lore or use Insight or someone with Herblore could drug the beast with the right herbs mixed in
with its meat.

The Elves of Mirkwood

Prince Bain is kept in a lightless cell in the dungeon. When
the company rescues him, he decides that it is time that
Girion pay for his crimes once and for all, and asks them
to accompany him as he storms the castle above. Move
onto Storming the Castle.

The difficulty of besieging the castle varies depending on
the preparations made by the company and the allies they
have. If the companions are few in number, then taking
a strong castle defended by so many foes will be very
difficult (anyone with Battle knows that, traditionally, the
attacker needs at least three times as many warriors as
the defender to take a fortified castle).

Gathering Allies
Should the companions prefer to besiege the castle, they
must first gather allies. There are four prospective factions
they might call on for aid:

In Dale

Thranduil’s Halls are not far from Castle Orlmond, and
the soldiers of the wood are few in number but great in
valour. Thranduil knows, though, that the strength of the
Elves is doomed to dwindle, and must be convinced to
spend a portion of that strength on mortal affairs.

Besieging the Castle

However, if the companions gather a huge force behind
them, then the courage of Girion’s men flees them and
they surrender.

Travelling to the town of Dale itself means walking into
the lion’s den. Girion has many supporters and allies in
Dale, especially in the Royal Palace. Most dangerous of
all, though, is Valdis herself. The Great Vampire regularly
visits King Bard to keep the king weak and delirious. If
Valdis is still alive, then she may attack any companions
who travel to Dale.

If Girion does not yield, then the swords will decide. The
Loremaster should describe in broad strokes the course of
the battle – how the defenders hurl down boiling oil and
arrows; how the attackers breach the gate and burst into
the bailey; how the foes are driven back up the hill and
so forth – and concentrate on the actions and the point of
view of the companions.

If the companions have already dealt with the Vampire
queen, then King Bard is on the mend. With healing and
inspiring words, they can rouse the old man (he is over
sixty years old by this time) and have him ride out one
more time to put down the pretender and rescue his son.

Young Girion is no coward, and takes part in the battle. If
the fighting takes place at night, then his mother may also
join the fray.

In the Dalelands
The locals are supporters of Girion, and have long grudges
against the Elves. However, if the company can convince
them that the Woodland Realm is not to be feared, and that
young Girion is a traitor in league with dark forces, they
can cut Girion’s support off and deny him reinforcements.

Erebor
A Dwarf of good Standing can plead with King Dáin to
intercede, and send warriors to besiege Castle Orlmond.
The Dwarves helped build the keep, and know it well. They
know how to break down the gates and breach the walls.

Storming the Castle
Once it becomes clear that the battle is lost, young Girion
and his guards retreat back to the keep and lock the
doors behind them to make their last stand in the great
arched feast-hall above. What the companions find there
when they finally force open the doors depends on their
previous actions:

If Valdis is still alive
If the Great Vampire is still around, then the companions
find that all the guards are dead. Climbing the stairs to the
main hall, they discover that Valdis has drained the blood
from all her son’s soldiers. As they enter, the Vampire
drops the body she holds and attacks.

110

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

•

If the companions have not yet rescued Prince Bain,
then she has just drained his blood. The company can
still save him, but he needs immediate assistance.

•

If Prince Bain is free, then in her thirst and madness
Valdis turned on her own son! Girion lies dead at her
feet.

Year 2974
Events
Word is sent from Woodmen-town that a great folk-moot
will be held at midsummer next year, to discuss the fate of
the Houses.

If Valdis is dead, and Prince Bain is a captive
The companions enter the great hall to see Girion holding
Bain hostage, a dagger to his throat. Words come spilling
out of Girion, about how he is destined to rule Dale and
how he is the only true heir.
•

A fierce storm strikes the land of the Beornings, scattering
their herds and tearing the roofs from their homes.

Adventuring Phase: Beorn’s Quest

Girion was unaware of his mother’s machinations,
and is convinced that he is an enemy of the Shadow.
The company can try to convince Girion to surrender
with Inspire or Persuade.

Beorn calls his most trusted men to him; if the companions
are among those he considers friends, then they are
counted in this number. They meet in secret at the Carrock
one night.

Alternatively, they can find a way to stop him from
stabbing Bain – say, with an accurate bow-shot.

“I have to go away for a while,” says Beorn. “There are
things I have to do. If I do not come back, then my son
Grimbeorn will take my place when he is of age. Until
then, he will be in the care and tutelage of his mother, and
some of you will have to run things in my absence. Do not
meddle in the affairs of others, do not let anyone tell you
what to do. And try not to upset my bees.”

If Girion has neither Valdis nor Bain
The young lord loses his mind and fights to the death,
screaming that the companions are servants of the
Shadow, and that doom has come.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End

He then turns to the companions. “I’ll need company on
the journey. I won’t bother warning you that it will be
dangerous and we might well all die horribly – I gather
those are the sort of journeys you’re used to. So, are you
coming?”

Any companion who helped in healing King Bard or in
saving Prince Bain may choose the Receive Title (Barding
Thegn) undertaking this year (see box below).

Receive Title (Barding Thegn)

as if he belonged to the Barding culture. Additionally,

King Bard has invited the companion to enter his service

score is not reduced, as if he returned home (see Standing

as a thegn, as a recognition for his deeds. To accept the

title, the adventurer must spend the Fellowship phase in

when a companion spends a Fellowship phase in Dale, his
Upkeep on p. 169 of the Adventurer’s Guide).

Dale and choose the Receive Title undertaking.

The companion is granted a tract of land to dwell upon,

If the hero is not a Barding, his Standing rating now also

Nether Marches. The size and features of the land grant

measures his repute among that folk. The hero may now

affect the narration of a Year’s End Fellowship phase

111

either in the Northern Dalelands, or in the Upper or
can be determined using the rules for holdings found at
page 8.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Each member of the company suffers a loss of Endurance
equal to the roll of a Feat die. Any companion who loses
eight or more Endurance must make a Protection test
to avoid being Wounded (TN 16). The roll of an C
indicates that the character has been knocked off by the
impact and falls, losing another Success die worth of
Endurance.

The Werewolf
If one of the company has become the new Werewolf

of Mirkwood (see The Dying of the Light ) then
Beorn insists that he come with Beorn on his journey.

There is, says Beorn, someone that the skinchanger
must talk to.

If the companions survive this initial assault, they can
climb the cliffs to attack the Mountain-trolls or ignore
them and run past.

Into the Misty Mountains
The companions set off from Beorn’s stead and travel
west, towards the purple line of the Misty Mountains in
the distance. They cross the Great River at the Carrock,
then their path takes to the north-west, to the tallest peaks
where the Eagles make their nests. Indeed, the companions
see a number of great birds circling far overhead. Beorn
waves at them, but instead of landing they wheel around
and fly west, travelling very fast and very far as if they
intend to cross the sea.
The early parts of the journey pass uneventfully. Beorn
refuses to talk about where they are going, saying that he
is sworn to secrecy. They will see what they see, he says,
and think what they think, and that is the end of that – if
they get there.
From Beorn’s House to the mountains covers some sixty
miles of easy terrain. This land is watched by the Beornings,
and there are no dangers; indeed, the Beornings in that
region welcome the company to stay with them each night.
After that, though, their journey takes them across the
trackless foothills of the Misty Mountains for some forty
miles.
Crossing this leg of the journey takes ten days and two or
three Fatigue tests at TN 20. Beorn is leading the company
into a region where travellers rarely go.

Attack of the Mountain-trolls
As the companions travel, stones begin to rain down
on them from far above. They have trespassed into the
territory of a pack of Mountain-trolls, who haunt the
peaks far above. The thick mists shroud the Trolls from
view, so the companions are taken by surprise.

Crossing the Border
Beorn leads the company higher and higher, past the
snow-line, into a grey realm of jagged peaks and howling
winds. The air is frightfully thin and cold up here, on the
roof of the world. At night, the stars are strange, as if huge
unseen shapes pressed against the firmament from the far
side.
“We are almost there,” says Beorn through his frost-rimed
beard. “If you want to turn back now, you can. If you want
to come with me, though, then you must promise never to
speak to anyone about what you see from this point on.”
The next day is the hardest of all. It is as though the
landscape was created to stop anyone crossing it. Every
foothold is treacherous and tries to send the traveller
falling to the sharp rocks below. The wind is a malicious
thing that deliberately tries to push a traveller off-course,
or blows snow and dust into their eyes. The biting cold is
malicious.
•

All characters must pass three Fatigue tests at TN 20;
each failed roll increases the companion’s Fatigue by 2.
A companion who is made Weary is unable to go on.

The Guardian
At the end of the day, the companions arrive at a sheer
cliff that blocks their path. From certain angles though,
the cliff looks like a gigantic stone face, as if an immense
giant was buried in the living rock of the mountain. Beorn
calls out to the face.
“Ho, old one. Wake up and let us pass.”

112

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

A mighty echo makes the booming voice of Beorn crack
like thunder. The ground shakes. Rocks fall as part of
the cliff crumbles. When the dust subsides, it is as if the
features of the face changed, and its eyes opened! A deep,
vibrant voice seem to emerge from the very roots of the
mountain, making the legs of the companions tremble.

that it would let us past on my word alone, but the world
is changing. If you want to get past, then you have to pay
a toll. Promise it a gift, take a vow or give it something.”
Suitable gifts for the guardian include:
•
•

“HRMMM. WHO WAKES ME? IS THAT YOU, BEORN?”
“Let me past, old one. I have business beyond.”

•
“WHO ELSE IS THAT WHO WALKS ON MY SNOWY BEARD?”
The companions should introduce themselves. Courtesy
seems the best choice, and anyone brazen enough to try
and use Awe on a mountain makes Beorn erupt with
laughter. But the voice is unimpressed anyway. It scorns
the company and their words.
“MORTALS AND STRAY ELVES, BEORN? NOTHING MORE?
YOU INSULT ME…”
Beorn beckons the company aside and explains what is
happening.
“This thing is not necessarily an evil thing, but the life and
the problems of mortals are but a trifle to it. I had hoped

Some wonderful treasure.
Taking a vow never to cross the Misty Mountains
again (the companion might still travel west by taking
the Gap of Rohan).
Singing a song for the guardian that makes it weep
(Song, TN 16)

Otherwise, the company and Beorn are stuck. They cannot
push through, and Beorn will be forced to lead them back,
before eventually returning alone.

The Other Side
If the companions pay the guardian its due, after a while
they spot a narrow set of stairs that wasn’t there before,
leading to a secret vale in the mountains. Thick fog turns
the vale into a strange, ghostly land. Beorn leads the
company through the mist-shrouded trees.
Some time later, the companions feel an irresistible urge
to lay down and sleep. Beorn is feeling the need to rest
too and invites the companions to lay down and stop

113

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

worrying. When they wake up, night has come and the
sky is alight with a thousand stars. The mist still covers
most of their surroundings.

The Hunter Comes
After a while, the heroes hear a hunting horn in the distance
and the sound of thundering hooves. Keen-eyed companions

believe they see a rider approaching, and moments later
everyone sees the terrifying, awesome figure of a hunter on
horseback, Man-like, yet greater in size, accompanied by
four huge bears who follow him like hounds.
Beorn bows his head. “Show no fear, but raise no weapon.
We must be resolute.”

The Werewolf of Mirkwood
If one of the companions is possessed by the spirit of the Werewolf of Mirkwood, then he must make his own Valour
test when confronted by the Hunter. The TN is equal to 18, plus the companion’s Shadow rating.

The skinchanging hero knows that if he fails the test, the Hunter will take him. The companion also knows that

he may enjoy a better chance to please the Hunter by taking on oaths or geases, imposing on himself a number of
magical obligations.

The hero may reduce the TN by accepting one or more strictures (TN -2 for each obligation). Should the companion

ever fail to honour the geases he has taken on (if any) he will gain a point of Shadow and his skinchanging powers
will fail him for one full year.

For each vow, roll the Feat die:

A:

Choose a geas of any type or roll again.

2.

Never eat anything but one type of food (choose one).

1.

3.
4.
5.

6.
7.

8.

9.

10.

Never eat meat in a particular place (choose a location or region).
Never cross a stream of running water in a particular season (choose one).
Never embark upon a journey under a full moon.

Never quarrel or fight with a member of a folk (choose one folk).

Never refuse to give quarter to a member of a folk (choose one folk).
Never sleep under the same roof as your fellow companions.
Never refuse the demand of a Wizard.

Never flee from an enemy (choose one enemy creature type).
Never fail to return home on Yule-tide.

C: The Hunter imposes a particularly grievous geas: roll on the table twice, but reduce the TN only by -2.
If the skinchanger eventually fails the Valour test, then the Hunter takes the companion with him when he leaves,
removing him from the campaign forever.

If the test is passed, then the curse of the Werewolf is lifted, and the companion is granted permission to take on the

shape of a wolf, just as Beorn can become a bear: the skinchanger may reduce his Shadow score by 3 points and

from now on he does not need to pass a Corruption test every Fellowship phase. The evil of the Werewolf is cleansed,
and the beast can now be a force for good.

114

The Year of the Plague:
2967-2974

And then the Hunter is upon them, like the crashing of a
great wave, like an onrushing storm. This rider is neither
Elf nor mortal Man, but a being older and stronger than
the Dark Lord himself.

•

All companions must make a roll using Valour, with a TN
equal to 14, plus the companion’s current Shadow rating.
•

Any companions who fail are unable to endure the
presence of the Hunter and must flee before him. If
all the companions fail, then Beorn is taken by the
Hunter and is never seen again.

•

If more than half the companions fail, the Hunter
shakes his head. Beorn nods, then turns to the
company. “I must leave you know. When my son
Grimbeorn is of age, bring him here so he may take
my mantle.”

•

If more than half the companions succeed, then the
Hunter salutes them. Beorn bows, and the Hunter
rides by. “I pass the test,” says Beorn, “he has seen
that I am still a friend to the Free Peoples.”

If the entire company succeeds, then the Hunter
blows a triumphant blast on the hunting horn. All the
companions see their maximum Hope score increase
permanently by two points. Beorn is overjoyed, and
explains that the Hunter has honoured the company.
They may return to the lowlands with joy in their
hearts.

Aftermath
If Beorn is still with the companions in their return
journey, they may ask the skinchanger about the
strange Hunter as they descend the mountains. The old
skinchanger shrugs his vast shoulders. “The Hunter has
many names,” he says. “Béma, some in the North call
him, for his voice can be heard for miles. Araw, the Elves
name him, for the same reason. He has been a friend to
the Elves since he found them, long long ago. He dwells
in the West, far away…”

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Nothing of note.

B

115

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

them, its light undiminished despite the gathering gloom
outside.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood:

The war-leader of the Woodmen addresses the diminished
crowd. After he speaks, other Woodmen advocate the
other options listed below.

2975-2977
The Shadow over the forest grows, and life in Mirkwood
outside the Woodland Realm becomes untenable. The
Woodmen are faced with a choice between fleeing or
making a last desperate assault on Dol Guldur.

Year 2975
Events
Dol Guldur looses a tide of evil on the wood. Orcs pour
out of Fenbridge Castle, and Spiders cross the Dusky River
using webbing as bridges.
Dark stormclouds hang low over the whole of Mirkwood
for weeks at a time, deepening the gloom and terrifying
the animals.
In the north, meltwater from the Grey Mountains causes
the Forest River to burst its banks and become unnavigable
for weeks. The force of the rushing river is enough to tear
down the ancient stone bridge outside Thranduil’s halls.
Pushed by the Wayward Elves (and by his own dark
moods, if he woke up from his poisoned sleep in 2970)
the Elvenking himself rides south to Woodmen-town,
accompanied by a host of Elves, to seek the return of the
Lamp.

Adventuring Phase:
the Last Folk-moot
The Woodmen gather at Woodmen-town. Ten years ago,
the great hall here could not have held more than a fraction
of their warriors and chieftains. Now, all the champions
of the Houses of the Woodmen gather here and the hall
is not even crowded. The Lamp of Balthi hangs above

If Mogdred is the war-leader – or if Ceawin is the leader,
and he is still in the thrall of the Wood-wight – then the
war-leader calls for an attack on Dol Guldur. For too long
the Woodmen have suffered in the darkness. The White
Council drove the Shadow away thirty years ago. What
Wizards can do, surely the brave warriors of the Wood
can do so too? They shall march with the Lamp of Balthi
as their banner, and lift the Shadow from the forest.
If another Loremaster character is the war-leader, then
they speak sadly of the plight of the Woodmen. The plague
and other horrors have robbed the Woodmen of their
strength. Few children remain alive.
Madness and death stalk the forest. Perhaps it is time
to leave their homes, to seek a better life elsewhere in
Wilderland. They could flee north, to the land of the
Beornings, or to the cold forests of Northern Mirkwood,
and abandon the halls of their ancestors.
Other Woodmen elders claim that they must endure.
There have been dark years before, when the Shadow
lay heavily on the forest. They can survive here, as their
forefathers did, if only they have courage. The Lamp will
protect them.

The Elves Arrive
King Thranduil and a retinue of Elven warriors arrive at
twilight. The Elvenking asks for permission to enter out of
courtesy, but will not take no for an answer, nor do the
Woodmen have the strength to bar their door against the
Elvenking and his warriors. Inside, Thranduil points to the
shining Lamp of Balthi.
“That Lamp was made by my kin, and hung from the door
of my father’s hall. It belongs to the Elves, and must be
returned to us. In my hall it will be safe. Leave it here, and
the Enemy will take it and destroy it.”

116

The Darkening of Mirkwood:
2975-2977

Lamp will be in terrible danger. The forces of Dol
Guldur know where the Lamp is, and they will keep
trying to destroy it.

Some of the Woodmen seem willing to listen to the Elves;
others angrily argue back, saying that Thranduil is trying
to steal their last treasure, their last hope with Elvish
trickery.
•

If they leave the Lamp to Thranduil, then he will lock it
away in his vaults. The Lamp will continue to shine its
light over Mirkwood, and maybe that will be enough
to keep the Shadow out of the northern forest – but
the land of the Woodmen will certainly fall under the
Shadow.

“The Lamp was made by the Elves of Hollin, my lord,
not your kin. If any living soul owns that Lamp, then it is
Elrond of Rivendell who has the best claim, for those few
who survived the ruin of Hollin now reside in his hidden
valley. The Lamp should go to Rivendell.”

•

If they send the Lamp to Rivendell, then it will be safe
(or, at least, as safe as any place in Middle-earth can
be), but Mirkwood will be lost to the Shadow. The Elves
may endure, but the Woodmen have little chance of
surviving in Mirkwood.

The First Choice

Radagast will advise the companions, but the ultimate
decision is theirs. If the companions do not choose to give
the Lamp to Thranduil, then the Elvenking respects their
decision, but many of the Wayward Elves do not. Their hostility
grows, as they no longer accept Thranduil as their king.

One overly impetuous young warrior even picks up his
axe – and suddenly freezes as if mesmerised. An old
man in drab brown robes emerges from the shadows
in the corner. Radagast the Brown raises his voice and
challenges Thranduil.

Radagast turns to the companions. “Your deeds are known
to all who stand here. They shall abide by your decision.
What is to be done with the Lamp?”
The players must choose the fate of the Lamp of Balthi:
•

The Second Choice

If they leave the Lamp where it stands, then the
Woodmen have the best chance of survival, but the

117

Once the companions have decided what to do with the
Lamp, the Woodmen must decide what they will do next.

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Year 2976

Only Woodmen companions may speak in this last
debate, or those who have been recognised as Heroes of
the Woodmen (see page 83).
Do they advocate for an attack on Dol Guldur, to stay where
they are or to abandon their halls and leave Mirkwood?
If the war-leader of the Woodmen serves Dol Guldur
(Mogdred or a still-possessed Ceawin), then they continue
to press for an attack on the black hold. Otherwise, the
war-leader’s recommended course of action is determined
by the fate of the Lamp. A passionate companion could
convince the Woodmen to follow one path or another.

Aftermath
If the folk-moot has decided for an attack on Dol Guldur, the
Woodmen begin mustering their forces. The companions
may wish to summon allies or call in any debts they have
obtained over the course of the campaign. The actual
attack takes place next year.
•

If the Lamp of Balthi is taken from Woodmen-town, then
the Western Eaves of Mirkwood become first a Wild Land;
then, both the Western Eaves and Western Mirkwood
degenerate into Shadow Lands. The Heart of Mirkwood
and the Narrows of the Forest become Dark Lands.
If the Elves of Mirkwood possess the Lamp of Balthi, then
there is light and feasting in the halls of Thranduil. Any
Elves of Mirkwood regain two points of Hope.
If the Woodmen chose to leave their halls, then they settle
in the lands of the Beornings and the fringes of Northern
Mirkwood. Raising new settlements is hard work, and
many will perish in the cold years to come.

Adventuring Phase:
The March of the Woodmen

Next year play the adventure The March of the
Woodmen.

If the folk-moot has resolved to send the Lamp of Balthi to
the safety of Rivendell, then someone has to carry it over
the Misty Mountains and find the hidden vale of Imladris.
•

Events

Next year play the adventure To Rivendell.

If the folk-moot accepted to give the Lamp to Thranduil,
then the Elvenking carries it back to his halls.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Nothing of note.

B

War-bands from all Houses of the Woodmen gather at
Woodmen-town. Warriors come from Woodland Hall and
Rhosgobel. If the companions have good relations with
the folk of Mountain Hall, then they send many warriors
too; otherwise, the Mountain-folk send only a handful of
hardy axe-men, but keep the greater part of their strength
back. If the Tyrant’s Hill or Sunstead are still part of the
Woodmen, then they too send warriors.
If the Woodmen carry the Lamp of Balthi with them as
their banner, then its light seems to change as it is lifted
aloft, becoming more fiery and piercing as if the Lamp
senses the darkness of the hour.
The war-leader must determine the tactics for the army.
Do they take boats down to the Black Tarn or do they
march along the banks of the Dusky River? Do they march
out in the open, following the edge of the forest down the
Vales of Anduin, or use the forest as cover and try to take
the enemy by surprise?

118

The Darkening of Mirkwood:
2975-2977

Running this Adventure
An attack on Dol Guldur is a doomed endeavour.
The warriors who go to war will never return. Any

companions who embark on this quest will likely
perish. The Loremaster should tell the players this

before the adventure begins - as it is what their
characters know in their hearts.

Victory is impossible. However, if the Woodmen

inflict enough damage on the forces of Dol Guldur,
they can drive back the darkness for many years. They

could buy time for the Woodmen to survive for another
generation or two in the woods. The companions may
well die here – but their deeds will live on.

Tracking the Fighting Strength
of the Woodmen
The numbers and combat ability of the Woodmen force is
measured using a value called Fighting Strength. Fighting
Strength starts at 7, and is increased as follows:
•
•
•
•
•

+1 if Mountain Hall sends warriors
+1 if the Tyrant’s Hill sends warriors
+1 if Sunstead sends warriors
+1 per ally the company bring
+3 if the companions bring the Lamp of Balthi

If the Fighting Strength of the Woodmen is ever reduced to
0, then their army is vanquished and scattered.

Treachery
If the war-leader of the Woodmen is in the service of Dol
Guldur, then he leads them into a trap. He urges them on,

119

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

faster and faster, to take the enemy by surprise. This haste
means that the Woodmen scouts cannot range ahead of
the advancing forces to give adequate warning and the
army finds itself trapped between Fenbridge Castle (or Dol
Guldur) and a host of Orcs and Spiders that emerge from
the trees. Pit the companions against many Orcs, Trolls
and Hunting Spiders.
•

The ambush reduces the Fighting Strength of the
Woodmen by the roll of a Success die.

Next, the Loremaster should roll the Feat die and consult
the table below to determine what sort of foes the
companions face. Each roll also reduces the Fighting
Strength of the Woodmen. Stop rolling when all the
companions are dead, or when the Fighting Strength of the
Woodmen is reduced to 0. The Loremaster should note the
number of times that he rolls on the Battle of Dol Guldur
table – each roll means that the Shadow of Dol Guldur is
lifted from Mirkwood for a little longer.

Fenbridge Castle
Roll

Foes

Fighting
Strength
Reduction

C

The Lieutenant of Dol Guldur
rides forth in full panoply of
battle to face the companions.

-3

1

One of the Children of Shelob
arrives.

-2

2

Mountain-Trolls

-2

3

Black Uruks lead by a Great Orc

-2

4

Wood-wights

-1

5

A swarm of Spiders led by
Hunting Spiders

-1

6

A pack of Wargs led by a Hound
of Sauron

-1

7

Servants of the Tyrant’s Hill

-1

8

A host of Forest Goblins and
Orcs

0

The swamps are a death trap for a whole army, and many
Woodmen perish in the mud. If this road is taken, then the
Fighting Strength of the Woodmen is reduced by the roll of
a Success die.

9

A miserable, beaten force of
slaves and Wild Men of the
Shadow.

0

10

A pack of shrieking Goblin
Archers and Orc Soldiers

0

The Battle of Dol Guldur

A

A breathing space – each
companion may regain
Endurance as per the Recovery
rules on page 144 of the
Adventurer’s Guide.

0

The second obstacle to be overcome is Fenbridge Castle.
This fortress blocks the only safe path to Dol Guldur. The
Woodmen can choose to either besiege the castle or else
try crossing the swamps beyond it.
Besieging the castle drains the army’s Fighting Strength by
1 point per day. Each day, roll the Feat die. On the result of
a A the castle falls. Reduce this threshold by one each day.
So, on the second day of siege, the castle falls on a 10 or
A, on the third on a 9, 10 or A, and so on.
•

•

Heroic actions by the companions, such as scaling
the walls, slaying monsters or sneaking into the castle
allows for the Feat die to be rolled twice, keeping the
best result.
If a companion is the war-leader, a successful Battle
test (TN 16) lowers the threshold by 1; a great success
by 2, and an extraordinary success by 3.

Finally, the Woodmen come to the very gate of the Hill
of Sorcery, and the full strength of Dol Guldur is loosed
upon them. The battle begins with a sudden wave of
unreasoning terror; each companion must pass a Fear test
– those who fail are daunted and cannot invoke Attribute
bonuses for the rest of the battle. This fear also reduces the
Fighting Strength of the Woodmen by 1.

Aftermath
The companions – and a whole generation of Woodmen
warriors – lie dead beneath the trees. What have they won
with their heroism?

120

The Darkening of Mirkwood:
2975-2977

Number
of Rolls

Result

1

Dol Guldur cannot attack this year, so
the surviving Woodmen families can flee
safely, but all of Mirkwood south of the
Elf-path is lost to the darkness.

2-3

The Shadow is beaten back for a few
years, giving the Woodmen time to
rebuild, but they cannot escape the
Shadow.

4-5

The sons of the Woodmen who died here
will face a renewed Shadow in the years
to come, but there may be as many as ten
years of peace.

6-10

A generation live peacefully in Mirkwood,
as the wounded Shadow retreats to lick
its wounds and rebuild its strength. The
Woodmen survive in Mirkwood.

is circling around the company, never far away, always
both behind and ahead but never in view. Wherever the
Messenger goes, it awakens things of evil: cruel men with
watchful eyes, hungry beasts and evil spirits.
The companions know they are being watched and
followed as they draw closer to the mountains.

The Voice in the Night
On the evening before the companions reach the High
Pass, a terrible storm blows out of the east. Snow and high
winds swirl around the mountains, so wild that even the
Eagles could not fly in such a tempest. The companions
realise that crossing the High Pass will be a test for even
the most seasoned traveller.
That night, their Look-out man hears a strange noise in
the darkness, like something sniffing the air. Then a voice
whispering into the companion’s ear. It is a cold voice, like
frost cracking a gravestone, like the death rattle of a sick
man, like the winds of winter. Call for a Corruption test
(TN 16); if the companion fails, he gains three Shadow
points.

The power of Dol Guldur is broken. The
Woodmen thrive in Mirkwood until the
11 or more
War of the Ring brings new enemies from
the East and South.

Adventuring Phase: to Rivendell

“Give me the Lamp. Give me the Lamp and I will give you
gold.”

The journey to Rivendell is a long one and perilous even
in good years, and this is far from a good year. The Enemy
can sense the movement of the Lamp of Balthi, and will
not let it go easily. The Messenger of Mordor is dispatched
from Dol Guldur to recover the Lamp before it reaches
Rivendell.

The Journey
From Woodmen-town to the High Pass is a journey of
some 180 miles, mostly through relatively friendly and
gentle terrain. The baleful influence of Dol Guldur means
the company faces fierce storms and driving rain, but
such weather is pleasant compared to the grim terrain of
Mirkwood. The companions are followed and harassed
by Orcs and Wargs, but these attacks are not a significant
danger to such experienced heroes.
More worrying are rumours of a rider in black, a dark
figure that passed through these lands, bringing sorrow
and fear with it. It is as though the Messenger of Mordor

If the companion hesitates, the Nazgûl makes another
offer. He might offer to spare the Look-out man’s children,
return some lost treasure, free a loved one from the
dungeons of Dol Guldur or lift some curse.
If the Look-out man rejects the offer, then all the sleeping
companions have strange, disturbing dreams where
similar offers are made to them; they must also all make
Corruption tests, as above.

Crossing the Mountains
The high pass is choked with ice and snow, meaning it is
close to impassable (TN 20 for Fatigue tests, and requiring
twelve days to cross. Furthermore, the Nazgûl’s proximity
makes this a blighted place (requiring a TN 18 Corruption
test each day to avoid gaining a Shadow point).
Potential Hazards include:

121

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Lost in the Mountains (Guide)
The Guide must pass a Travel test or the companions from
now on will trigger Hazards on a roll of a 1 or 2 on the Feat
die as well as an C.
Crevasse (Scout)
The Scout must make an Explore test at TN 18; if he fails, he
does not notice an icy crevasse that crosses the company’s
path. The companion with the highest Encumbrance
breaks the ice over the crevasse and falls thirty feet into
the depths (see Falling, page 50 of the Loremaster’s Guide).
Furthermore, the crevasse leads into Goblin tunnels, and
they heard the companion come crashing down. They are
coming…
No Fire (Huntsman)
The company’s supply of fuel is lost, and without a fire they
will perish. The Huntsman must find a supply of wood to
keep them alive. A successful TN 16 Hunting test finds a
small stand of trees in a sheltered alcove. However, these
trees are watched by Orcs.
Stalking in the Night (Look-out)
The Look-out spots signs of Orcs trying to sneak up on
the company. If he fails an Awareness test (TN 16), then
the Orcs are able to ambush the company one night. If he
passes, then he is able to rouse the alarm in time.

Avalanche (All Companions)
The companions hear a loud, inhuman wail echoing up
from somewhere far ahead. In response, the mountainside
cracks and crumbles, sending tons of snow and rock
pouring down towards the companions.
Each companion must make an Athletics test (TN
16). Failing means the companion is swept away in the
avalanche, losing 15 points of Endurance and risking a
wound (Protection test, TN 18 to avoid). Success avoids
any damage; a great or extraordinary success lets the
companion rescue another member of the company who
failed the Athletics test.

The Last Foe
On the ninth day, the companions come to the crest of
a ridge, and find that they have crossed the spine of
the mountains. All of Eriador stretches out below them.
Straight ahead, they can see the hills of the Trollshaws
and the broken lands of the mountain foothills. To their
right lies the snowy expanse of the Coldfells, and below
them the sunlight glitters off the winding waters of the
Loudwater. Somewhere in that unfamiliar wilderness lies
the hidden valley of Rivendell.
As the companions descend the western slopes of the Misty
Mountains, they spot a line of footprints in the snow. On

122

The Darkening of Mirkwood:
2975-2977

closer examination, they are hoof-prints. Most of the trail
is obscured by the shifting snows, but there is a clear line
of prints ahead of the company, left by a heavy horse. The
Messenger of Mordor crossed the mountains first.

Year 2977

That night, as twilight draws in, the Nazgûl appears out of
the darkness. “Give me the Lamp”, it hisses, “or perish”. It
draws its long sword, and the steel of its blade is reflected
in hundreds of eyes behind it. A host of Orcs crawled out
of some noisome cavern in the foothills of the mountains,
and now surround the company.

In Erebor, Balin son of Fundin, one of the twelve
companions of Thorin Oakenshield, suggests that the
strength of the kingdom is growing, and that in a few years
they could turn their gaze west to the halls of Durin. Any
Dwarves, or even non-Dwarves of good reputation, might
be invited to discuss this plan.

There are too many Orcs to defeat. The companions have
two options:

Epilogue: The Passing of the King

•

•

Unveil the Lamp, and hope that scouts from
Rivendell see the Light. The burning Lamp of Balthi
blazes with an unearthly radiance, as though a star
descended to rest on the mountains. It is visible as far
west as Weathertop. All the companions need to do is
survive through the night, and the next day they will
be met by the sons of Elrond who will escort them to
Rivendell.
Some flee, others stand and fight. If some
members of the companions remained behind to hold
back the Nazgûl, the others could escape down the
mountainside to safety.

At Rivendell
Bright Elf-lords escort the Lamp of Balthi and its defenders
into the hidden valley of Imladris. There, the companions
meet with Elrond Halfelven, who invites them to rest in the
Last Homely House. In its fabled Hall of Fire the Lamp of
Balthi will hang, until even Rivendell will be no more.

Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
Companions in Rivendell may choose the Open New
Sanctuary undertaking.

Events

In this year, King Bard the Dragonslayer dies in bed, and
the crown of Dale passes to his son, Prince Bain. Many
gather in Dale, both to celebrate the new king and to
discuss recent events in Wilderland.
Thirty years have passed since the company first met in
Wilderland. Thirty times have the black leaves fallen in
the wild wood. A lifetime, as the short-lived Northmen
reckon time; a brief spell for the immortal Elves. This
final year is an opportunity for the surviving companions,
if any, to reflect on their deeds and even lay down their
burdens. Characters who helped Prince Bain in earlier
adventures can retire to the safety of Dale. Others may
prefer to continue adventuring outside Mirkwood.
The forest itself lies under a dark shadow. The Woodmen,
if they still endure, are few in number. Radagast remains
in his cottage at Rhosgobel, where he has lived for many
years, but his absences grow longer and longer as he
wanders the forest. Some rumours claim he goes to visit
the River-maidens, other stories say he travels through the
wood in the shape of a bird or a fox.
In the south, the Messenger of Mordor leaves Dol Guldur.
The Ringwraith is recalled to Barad-Dûr, to report to
Sauron. What tidings does he bring the Dark Lord on his
Dark Throne? Does the Nazgûl tell that the north is weak
and divided, or does he speak of heroes that drove back
the Shadow from the wood?

123

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

124

125

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

In gaming terms, this lesser stature is reflected by the
three Nazgûl’s Attribute levels; theirs is a relatively low
value – even if at night it is doubled by their Denizen of the
Dark ability (the physical power and the fear inspired by
the Nazgûl is enormously increased in darkness).

The Nazgûl of
Dol Guldur
Nine (rings) he gave to Mortal Men, proud and
under the dominion of the One, and they became

The Ringwraiths’ Attribute level will progressively become
higher as the Shadow grows, in anticipation of the War of
the Ring.

most terrible servants.

The Nazgûl as Dark Undead

great, and so ensnared them. Long ago they fell

Ringwraiths, shadows under his great Shadow, his

The Nazgûl wear robes or suits of armour to assume a
shape when they must have dealings with the living. But
even when given a physical shape they cannot be easily
destroyed, for the power of their Master is in them as long
as the Ruling Ring endures.
•

A Ringwraith suffers damage normally in combat,
but is not defeated when reduced to zero Endurance.
Instead, the Nazgûl loses half its current Hate and
becomes Craven (it flees if reduced to zero Hate).

Nazgûl cannot be Wounded except by weapons especially
wound with spells for the bane of Mordor. A Nazgûl who
is both wounded and reduced to zero Endurance vanishes
with a shrill wailing.

The Nazgûl when Unclad and Invisible
When unclad, the Ringwraiths are invisible, safe for a
deadly gleam of eyes, but the terror they evoke is even
greater.
•
The evil spirits sent by Sauron to reclaim Dol Guldur
are three of the Nine Nazgûl, the apple of the Great Eye.
The chief among them is the Black Easterling, second
in command only after the Lord of Morgul himself, the
Witch-king of Angmar.
When the Ringwraiths return to Mirkwood in 2951, Sauron
has just entered his fastness in Mordor and is still far from
reclaiming his ancient power. As their fate is inextricably
linked to that of their Master, the Nazgûl of Dol Guldur are
yet but a dark reflection of what the Nine will become in
sixty years time, when the Lord of the Rings will unleash
them and their Black Captain to hunt for the One Ring.

When forced to make a Fear test in the presence of an
invisible Ringwraith, a companion rolls the Feat die
twice and keeps the worst result.

Invisible Nazgûl cannot attack or be attacked physically,
but may target enemies using other special abilities
(the stats corresponding to weapon attacks and special
abilities requiring a physical form are ignored when a
Ringwraith is unclad).

Common Weapons
When appearing as Dark Undead the Nazgûl employ their
weapons to lethal effect.

126

Appendix: The Nazgûl of
Dol Guldur

Miserable until able to rest for a prolonged time. If the
Corruption test fails with an C then the companion
has been stricken by the Black Shadow (see box on the
following page).

Weapons of the Ringwraiths:
Weapon

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

Long sword

7 (1h)
9 (2h)

9

16 (1h)
18 (2h)

Disarm

Claw

Attribute
Level

C

16

-

type

A Ringwraith can force a companion to make a new
Corruption test for the Black Breath by reducing its Hate
score by one point.

Notes

Deadly Voice

Long sword: The Ringwraiths wield their sword of steel
with one hand when they want to claw at their opponent
employing their Savage Assault ability. Otherwise, they
swing their long swords with both hands.

Special Abilities
All Ringwraiths wield many powers dark and terrible and
can prove lethal either if encountered in the flesh or faced
as shapeless wraiths. (The individual descriptions for
the three Nazgûl of Dol Guldur may indicate additional
abilities, appropriate to the character described).

Powers of the Ringwraiths
Denizen of the Dark
Thing of Terror*
Black Breath
Deadly Voice
Dreadful Spells: Shadow of Fear

Only as Dark Undead
Dwimmerlaik
Fear of Fire

*The TN for all Fear tests provoked by the Nazgûl is equal
to 10 plus the Attribute level of the most powerful among
them, adding 1 for every additional Ringwraith present.

Black Breath
Anyone who comes near the Nazgûl must immediately
make a Corruption test. The TN is equal to 10 plus the
Attribute level of the most powerful Nazgûl, adding 1 for
every additional Ringwraith present. A companion who
fails the roll gains a Shadow point and falls unconscious.
A successful Healing roll revives the character. Upon
awakening, the character is confused and is temporarily

The Ringwraiths scream at their enemies with longdrawn wails that rise to a deafeningly high piercing note.
Reduce the creature’s Hate point score by one to make a
companion who failed a Fear test and thus was daunted
to additionally become temporarily weary. The effect ends
when the companions leave the presence of the Nazgûl.

Dreadful Spells: Shadow of Fear
The Ringwraiths are capable of provoking a terror so great
in any Man, Hobbit or Dwarf that the victim becomes an
agent for the Shadow. The spell lasts a number of weeks
equal to the highest Attribute level among the Nazgûl
faced by the victim. A spellbound agent tries to accomplish
what the Ringwraith commanded him to do out of great
fear (usually to report information or to carry out a single
task) but is generally loathe to do it or otherwise nervous
about it.
A victim of the Shadow of Fear can be snapped out of
the spell with an Awe roll or another personality skill
appropriate to the situation, but only if the roll results in a
great or extraordinary success. The TN to break the spell is
equal to 10 plus the Attribute level of the Ringwraith who
placed the Shadow of Fear on the agent.

Dwimmerlaik
A companion who hits a Ringwraith for a Piercing blow
using a close combat weapon must immediately make
a Valour test: if the roll fails, the weapon used to strike
the Nazgûl breaks into many shards, and the hero loses
a number of Endurance points equal to the Attribute level
of the Ringwraith he attacked. Additionally, the character
is considered to have been exposed to the Black Breath.
Note that a Piercing blow scored using a normal weapon
cannot wound a Ringwraith.

127

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The Black Shadow
A victim of the Black Shadow remains unconscious for a number of days equal to the Attribute level of the

highest-rated Ringwraith the character faced when he was exposed to the Black Breath. For each of these days,
the sick character must pass a Corruption test against TN 16 or gain a point of Shadow; reduce the TN to 14 if
the hero is assisted with a successful Healing roll.

Should a stricken hero’s Shadow rating overcome his Hope score during the malady, then the character slips into

ever deeper dreams and then dies. If the hero resists for the length of the malady, he finally overcomes his sickness
and wakes up (but maintains the new Shadow score).

The Lieutenant of Dol Guldur
Chief of the three Wraiths of the forest, the Lieutenant
remains Unclad and Invisible while in Dol Guldur,
speaking from the shadows as the Necromancer did.
When he must go abroad as a Dark Undead he is clad as
a tall Easterling warrior wearing a black suit of armour,
his invisible face concealed behind a heavy mask.

The Lieutenant of Dol Guldur:
Attribute Level
5

Endurance

Hate

60

12

Parry

Armour

7

2d

Skills
Personality, 4
Movement, 3
Perception, 4

Survival, 2
Custom, 2
Vocation, 4

Weapon Skills
Long sword
Claw

3
3

Special Abilities
Horrible Strength

Savage Assault

128

Appendix: The Nazgûl of
Dol Guldur

The Ghost of the Forest

The Messenger of Mordor

The Ghost of the Forest roams Mirkwood Unclad and
Invisible, and can only be discerned as a rustling in the
leaves, a sudden chill in the air, and an unreasoning
terror that strikes the very soul.

The chief messenger of Sauron has been given a swift black
horse and raiment to hide his Dark Undead features, so
that he may present himself at the gates of Men, Elves or
Dwarves to carry his Lord’s will.

The Ghost of the Forest:

The Messenger of Mordor:

Attribute Level

Attribute Level

4

4

Endurance

Hate

Endurance

Hate

50

10

50

10

Parry

Armour

Parry

Armour

6

2d

6

2d

Survival, 3
Custom, 2
Vocation, 2

Personality, 2
Movement, 3
Perception, 3

Skills
Personality, 3
Movement, 3
Perception, 2

Skills

Weapon Skills
Long sword
Claw

Survival, 3
Custom, 3
Vocation, 2

Weapon Skills
3
2

Long sword
Claw

Special Abilities

2
3

Special Abilities

Fell Speed (only when Unclad and Invisible)

Bewilder

129

Savage Assault

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

characters and
creatures

Geirbald Kinslayer

Included in this appendix is a summary of any relevant
characters, creatures and monsters from The Heart of the
Wild that appear in The Darkening of Mirkwood.

Bofri son of Bofur
This young Dwarf was sent by King Dáin to the Woodmen
of Mirkwood with a royal command. Bofri’s mission is to
examine the state of the Old Forest Road and determine if
it could be re-opened.

Bofri is brave and clever, and eager to see the world. His
father, one of the companions of Thorin Oakenshield, is
today a Dwarf of wealth and influence under the Mountain,
but Bofri intends to match his deeds. He plans to live
among the Woodmen for a few years, learning the ways
of the wood before exploring the Road and discovering
which of the old keeps and fortifications survive.
Attribute level:
3
Specialities:
Stone-Craft, Map-Making
Distinctive Features: Energetic, Adventurous.
Relevant skills:
Explore ♦♦♦, Craft ♦♦♦♦
Endurance:
21

Geirbald is a Woodman, of the House of Woodland
Hall. In years past, he was accounted a great hunter and
warrior among his people. On one hunt, the Werewolf of
Mirkwood attacked their company; young Geirbald bore
a bitter hatred of the beast, and loosed arrow after arrow
at it, hoping to slay it. Even when his companions were
scattered and the beast leapt away into the underbrush,
he kept shooting until his quiver was empty. The next
morning, scouts found the body of Geirbald’s younger
sister lying in the bushes. One of her brother’s reckless
arrows killed her.
Stricken with guilt and horror, Geirbald fled Woodland
Hall. Since then, he has lived in the forest as an outlaw.
A dozen warriors joined him, and together the thirteen
roam the deep forests, hunting Orcs and Wolves. Their
chief camp is in Western Mirkwood, and they winter
there. Some of Geirbald’s men are still welcome in
Woodland Hall and Woodmen-town, but others are illfavoured men, or outlaws, or madmen. These outlaws
rarely prey on travellers or commit crimes. They are
called outlaws because they are not part of any of the
Houses of the Woodmen, and so are outside the law of
society.
Attribute level:
5
Specialities:
Mirkwood-Lore, Beast-Lore
Distinctive Features: Hardened, True-Hearted
Relevant skills:
Hunting ♦♦♦♦♦,
Long-hafted Axe ♦♦♦
Endurance:
17

Halbrech the Wineseller
Merry Halbrech hails from distant Dorwinion, though
he lives in Lake-town. He is one of the merchants who
provide wine for the Elvenking’s table. Halbrech’s father
Harod was a particular favourite of Thranduil, for he had
an excellent palate and could find the very best wine in
each season. The House of Harod has long been under the
patronage of the Woodland Realm.
Halbrech’s ruddy round face and feigned happiness hide
a terrible secret. Many years ago, a servant of the Enemy
seduced him into telling her the secrets of the Woodland

130

Appendix: Characters
and Creatures

Realm. Halbrech knew a great deal about the defences of
Thranduil’s Halls, and could guess at how many warriors
served the Elvenking.
When the White Council drove the Necromancer from
Dol Guldur, Halbrech dared to hope that his ordeal was
over, and that the Enemy’s spies would never contact him
again. He made arrangements to destroy any evidence of
his treason.
Attribute level:
4
Specialities:
Elven-Lore, Trading
Distinctive Features: Merry, Secretive
Relevant skills:
Courtesy ♦♦♦♦, Stealth ♦♦♦
Endurance:
16

Mogdred
Once, Mogdred was a warrior and hunter from Rhosgobel,
green as the first leaves of spring. Orcs captured him in
battle and carried him off to the dungeons of Dol Guldur.
There, he chose to serve instead of facing the tortures of
the pit. He rose swiftly in the Necromancer’s favour, and
became Captain of the Guard. He was clad in Orc-mail
from head to toe, and given an ancient blade forged by
those renegades called the Black Númenóreans. Mogdred
was feared as the right hand of the Necromancer.
In truth, his role was to deceive, not to conquer. To maintain
his disguise, Sauron could not send the Ringwraiths to do
his bidding, nor could he reveal himself. Therefore, he
used Mogdred as his mouthpiece among his servants, and
as an envoy among his enemy.
When Sauron fled Dol Guldur, Mogdred was forsaken,
left to command a fortress deserted of its defenders.
From a high place, he spied the Wise approaching
and fear overcame him. Angry at the Necromancer’s
betrayal, Mogdred fled Dol Guldur with a retinue of
trusted followers. Today, he inhabits the tower upon
Amon Bauglir, the Tyrant’s Hill, and has gathered many
warriors and fell beasts to his side, with the intent of
creating his own kingdom in the wood. Whether he shall
ally himself with Dol Guldur once more, or try to preserve
his petty domain by allying with the Woodmen against
his former masters is a question he has yet to answer.

Attribute level:
6
Specialities:
Shadow-Lore, Mirkwood-Lore
Distinctive Features: Bold, Reckless
Relevant skills:
Battle ♦♦♦♦, Awe ♦♦♦♦, Sword ♦♦♦
Endurance:
20

Valdis
The line of Girion has fallen low indeed, for one of its
daughters to be a murderous outlaw. Valdis is a direct
descendant of the old kings of Dale; her great-grandfather
was a young boy who was spirited out of the wreck of
Dale when the Dragon came. Valdis grew up in Lake-town
as a penniless beggar with dreams of lost glory. Her one
companion was a strange mad raven of the mountain
called Eyebiter. The raven has a taste for human flesh,
especially the carrion of the battlefield.
In 2940, young Valdis stabbed a man in a tavern in
Lake-town and fled into the wilderness. She is clever and
charismatic, and dreams of returning to Dale as queen.
She blames Bard for ‘stealing’ her throne, and believes
that if she had been in Dale in 2941, she would have been
the one to bring the Dragon down. Bard took her place in
the prophecies, or so she claims.
Those who have played through Kinstrife and Bad Tidings
from the Tales from Wilderland anthology may notice a
resemblance between Valdis and the warlord Valter the
Bloody; they are both rotten fruit from the same family
tree. Valter is her cousin, the son of her father’s sister. If
the player characters were responsible for slaying Valter
the Bloody, then Eyebiter brought tidings of his death to
Valdis, and she swore bloody vengeance upon those who
slew her kin.
Attribute level:
5
Specialities:
Esgaroth-lore, Intrigue
Distinctive Features: Determined, Fair, Cunning
Relevant skills:
Hunting ♦♦♦, Battle ♦♦,
Riddle ♦♦♦♦
Endurance:
19

131

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Forest Goblins
The Orcs of Mirkwood are wiry, pale creatures, mostly
inhabiting the caves under the Mountains of Mirkwood
and haunting the ruins of Dol Guldur. Their long limbs and
bony hands are surprisingly powerful, a characteristic
that many enemies discovered too late.

When they leave their underground lairs they smear filth
and mud over themselves, to better hide in the gloom of
the forest. They are excellent climbers and trackers, and
often clamber through the canopy instead of travelling
along the ground. They have a special terror of Spiders,
as Forest Goblins are one of the most common snacks for
a hungry spider.

Forest Goblin:
Attribute Level
2

Endurance

Hate

10

2

Parry

Armour

2 +1 (buckler)

2d

Skills
Personality, 1

Survival, 2

Movement, 3

Custom, 1

Perception, 2

Vocation, 1

Weapon Skills
Stone Spear

2

Jagged Knife

1

Weapons:

Special Abilities

Weapon

Hate Sunlight

Craven

Horrible Strength

Mirkwood-dweller*

type

Stone Spear

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

4

10

12

Pierce

Notes
*Mirkwood-dweller: While the creature fights inside
Mirkwood its Parry score is doubled.
132

The spears of Forest Goblins have wicked heads of
stone that sometimes break (the spear breaks on an
attack roll of A

Appendix: Characters
and Creatures

Hunter Spiders
Hunter Spiders are said to be the spawn of Tauler the Hunter and his sister Sarqin. They are large, hairy beasts, quicker
and stronger and more aggressive than the rest of their kin. They do not spin webs, but lurk in the shadows and under
piles of dead leaves until their unsuspecting prey comes near.

Hunter Spider:
Attribute Level

Weapons:

4

Endurance

Hate

25

3

Parry

Armour

6

3d

Weapon
type

Beak

Custom, 1

Perception, 2

Vocation, 1

Weapon Skills
Beak

2

Special Abilities
Great Leap

Horrible Strength

Injury

Called
Shot

6

C

15

Poison

These giant spiders do not inject poison in their
victims using a sting, but with their beak, as does
Tauler, their sire.

Survival, 3

Movement, 3

Edge

Notes

Skills
Personality, 2

Damage

Spider-poison: A poisoned character is paralysed and
falls to the ground the round following the bite, in addition
to suffering from the normal effects of being Poisoned (see
page 144 of the Adventurer’s Guide). The effects of poison
wear off after one full day.
133

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

The Children of Shelob

choose to be ‘knocked back’ to lesser the impact of the
blow that knocked him down. A character that has been
knocked down cannot change his stance and will spend
his following round recovering his fighting position,
unable to take any further action that turn.

Far and wide her lesser broods ... spread from glen

to glen, ... to Dol Guldur and the fastnesses of
Mirkwood.

Tauler, Tyulqin and Sarqin are the spawn of Shelob the
Great, the last child of Ungoliant, the weaver of darkness,
ancient evil in spider-form. They hide deep inside the
Heart of Mirkwood, their domain.

The Children of Shelob in Combat
The three spider-things are ancient, and care for their
hideous hides. If any one of them is wounded in combat
once, or reduced to zero Endurance, it breaks off the fight
and attempts to flee.

Weapons:
Weapon

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

Beak

Attribute
Level

8

18

Poison

Stomp

Attribute
Level

C

14

Knockdown

type

Sarqin, the Mother-of-All
The Spiders of Mirkwood revere Fat Sarqin as the Motherof-All. While she certainly didn’t spawn everything that
goes on eight legs in the forest, she might well have given
birth to half of them. Sarqin is a gigantic, bloated spiderthing, with multiple bulbous eyes that glow coldly in the
dark.
Sarquin doesn’t usually leave her abode above
Spiderhollow, not even when her Spider servants fail to
bring her food — in those cases, she stays her appetite on
her numerous offspring.

Fat Sarqin:
Attribute Level
8

Endurance

Hate

Notes

90

8

Beak: These giant spiders inject poison in their victims
using a beak.
Stomp: The Children of Shelob use their massive bodies
as a crushing weapon.

Parry

Armour

5

3d

Skills
Personality, 4

Called Shot Effects:
Weapon type

The target has been Poisoned.*

Knockdown

The target has been Knocked
down.**

Movement, 1

Custom, 3

Perception, 3

Vocation, 2

Weapon Skills

Succesful Called Shot

Poison

Survival, 2

Ensnare

3

Beak

4

Special Abilities

*Greater Spider-Poison: A poisoned character is paralysed
and falls to the ground the round following the bite, in
addition to suffering from the normal effects of being
Poisoned (see page 144 of the Adventurer’s Guide). The
paralysis wears off after 1-6 full days (roll one Success die).
**Knockdown: The target has been knocked down by the
force of the blow. A character that is knocked down cannot

Great Size

Seize Victim

Thick Hide

Thing of Terror (TN 16)

Foul Reek

Countless Children*

*Countless Children: Sarqin’s spawn are never far away.
By spending a point of Hate, she may summon a number
of Great Spiders equal to her current Hate score. These
Spiders arrive the following round.

134

Appendix: Characters
and Creatures

Tauler, the Hunter
Tauler is as large as a small elephant, yet he is nimble for
his size. He can also be very patient and can lay in ambush
for weeks, waiting for the perfect moment to attack. Not
that he fears any opponent — his beak is hard as steel, and
his hide can withstand the edge of the toughest of blades.

He has feasted on the blood of Elves and Men, and intends
to do so for a long time to come.

Savage Tauler:
Attribute Level
7

Endurance

Hate

60

8

Parry

Armour

8

3d

Skills
Personality, 3

Survival, 4

Movement, 4

Custom, 3

Perception, 4

Vocation, 3

Weapon Skills
Beak

5

Stomp

3

Special Abilities

135

Great Size

Horrible Strength

Hideous Toughness

Strike Fear (TN 16)

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

Tyulqin, the Weaver
Tyulqin spins webs as black as the void between the stars, making her lair darker than the pits of Dol Guldur. Her malice
is so twisted that the minds of mortals are simple toys to manipulate with phantoms and illusions. There aren’t many
heroes in Middle-earth who can dare defy the sight of this many-legged horror.

Black Tyulqin:
Attribute Level
9

Endurance

Hate

60

8

Parry

Armour

7

3d

Skills
Personality, 4

Survival, 3

Movement, 3

Custom, 2

Perception, 4

Vocation, 4

Weapon Skills
Ensnare

3

Beak

4

*Stupefy: A hero who fails a Corruption check (TN 16)
due to Dreadful Spells falls under the thrall of the spider,
and walks straight into the nearest web. The companion
loses his next action and is automatically captured as if
targeted by a successful Seize Victim ability.
**Many Poisons: When Tyulqin poisons a hero, instead
of paralysing him she may choose to inflict one of the
following effects (Loremaster’s choice):
• Despair: The victim is counted as Miserable.
• Drowning in Sorrow: The victim must make a Corruption
(TN 14) test each day to avoid gaining a Shadow point.
• Weakened: The victim is counted as Weary.
• Sleep: The victim falls unconscious.
• Crazed: The victim is treated as if having all the Flaws
associated with their Shadow weakness.

Special Abilities
Great Size

Seize Victim

Strike Fear (TN 20)

Dreadful Spells*

Webs of Illusion***

Many Poisons**

***Webs of Illusion: Tyulqin can weave magical webs
to deceive and bewilder her enemies. By spending a
point of Hate, she can automatically ambush her foes (all
companions are considered to be surprised).
136

Appendix: Characters
and Creatures

Wood-wights
During the long centuries of the rule of the Necromancer, many evil spirits issued from Dol Guldur. Some found their
way into the burial places of the Northmen, others inhabited the corpses of lost travellers and victims of the Spiders.
Those who have seen Wood-wights and lived to tell the tale speak fearfully of shambling horrors composed of bones,
leaf mould and fallen tree branches, and skulls that leered out of the darkness.

Wood-wight:

*Horror of the Wood: If the creature is encountered
in Mirkwood, all rolls of Battle made to gain Combat
Advantages see their TN raised by the creature’s Attribute
Level (+5).

Attribute Level
5

Endurance

Hate

54

8

Parry

Armour

7

4d

Weapons:
Weapon
type

Strangling
Claws

Skills
Personality, 1

Survival, 1

Movement, 3

Custom, 2

Perception, 2

Vocation, 3

Weapon Skills
Strangling Claws

3

Special Abilities
Denizen of the Dark

Craven

Strike Fear (TN 16)

Fear of Fire

Horror of the Wood*

The Wood-Wight’s very high Endurance and Armour score
reflect the thing’s resilience to harm inflicted by corporeal
weapons.

137

Damage

Edge

Injury

Called
Shot

5

C

16

-

The Hill
of Skulls

E

E

Eagles’ Falls

E

E

E

E

E

The High Pass

E

E

Glade

E The Burned

E

The House
E of Beorn

E

E

The Grey Heath
The Old Ford

E

E The Cleft of Storms

E

E

E

The Beacon Tower
E

the Elvenking

E
E The Hall of

E

Ruins of the Refuge

The Enchanted Stream

E

The Spider’s Ring

The East Gate

E The Lampmaker’s House

The Sentinel Oak
The Great Clearing E

E The Old Forest Road

E

The White Statues

E The Elf-path

The Roaring Falls

E The Forest Gate

E The Elfwood

The Mouth of Dust

E

The Carrock

E The Back Door

The Eyrie E

E

The Hoary Mountain

Isle of Strangling Trees

The Long Delve E

138

The Path
of Serpents

The North Ford E

The City of the Éothéod

E

The Lost Watchtower
E
The Hidden House

The Greydelve

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

E Dwarrowhall

139

E

E

Dol Guldur

E

E

E

E

Demon’s Tower (Minas Raug)

E

The Old Oak

The Corpse-Woods

The Lost River E

E

The Parliament of Spiders

E Tyrant’s Hill (Amon Bauglir)

E Rhosgobel

Fenbridge Castle

E The Toft

E

Field of Heroes

E Isildur’s Field

The Ford of
the Leofrings

Kingstone E

The Lady’s Garden

Holes of the
Wild Hobbits

The Elftower E

E

Hag’s Island E

Dwimmerhorn E

The Old Dwarf Road

E

E

The Long Barrows

Stonehallow E
E
The Wolfswood
E
Woodmen-town E
Trader’s Island

E Mountain Hall

E

The Village of Stonyford
E Woodland Hall

The Barrows of the Northmen

Pale Rider Caves E

Elendil’s Camp

Region Map

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

- index -

Crossing the Border
(A) Cup of Poison
Customising the Adventures

112
85
7

A
Acquiring a Suitable Gem
51
Affairs of Court
85
After the Journey
37
Aftermath 58, 78, 93, 104, 115, 118, 120
All is Lost
79
Amaleoda, Shieldmaiden of the Black Tarn 14
(The) Ambush
82
Angivisell
90
Appendix
125
(Gathering an) Army
74
(The) Assassin
44
Atarmud & the Ghost
70
Athala’s Tale
60

D
(In) Dale
(News from) Dale
(In the) Dalelands
(The) Darkening of Mirkwood
(Dealing with) Dagmar
(A) Dead Giveaway
Deadly Voice
(The) Death of the Beast
(The) Debate
Dinner in the Hall
(Into) Dol Guldur
(The Battle of) Dol Guldur
(The Secret of) Dol Guldur
Dwimmerlaik

110
97
110
4, 116
12
47
127
102
16
91
21
120
23
127

B
Bane of Wolves
79
(King) Bard in 2956
41
(The Coming of the) Beast
31
(The Lair of the) Beast
33
Beast-tamer
12
(After) the Battle
32
Black Breath
127
(The) Black Shadow
128
(From the) Black Tarn to the Tyrant’s Hill 20
(Return to the) Black Tarn
56
(To the) Black Tarn
20
Blood Ties
95
Bofri, son of Bofur
15, 130
(The) Bow of Sudden Fury
18
Breaking the Spell
36, 51
Burin the Dwarf Merchant
89
Burin Vanishes
91
C
(Besieging the) Castle
110
(Sneaking into the) Castle
109
(Storming the) Castle
110
Ceawin Speaks
15
Ceawin the Generous
14, 62, 63
Changeling Characters
98
Characters and Creatures
130
(Into the) Chasm
105
(The) Children of Shelob
134
Choking Weeds and Yelling Goblins
46
(A) Chronology of Wilderland
4
Companions as Envoys
42
Contents
3
(The) Council at Lake-town
42

E
Elfsigil		
(The) Elves Arrive
(The) Elves of Mirkwood
Enthral
Erebor		
Exploring the High Keep

96
116
110
107
110
22

F
(The) Far End of the Forest
36
(At the) Fenbridge
81
Fenbridge Castle
120
(To) Fenbridge Castle
81
(The) Festival
76
Flor’s Secret
66
Foes Neat at Hand
37
(Judgement of the) Folk-moot
16
(The) Forest Dragon
99
(Fighting the) Forest Dragon
99
(Hunting the) Forest Dragon
99
Forest Goblins
132
Fridwald the Runner, of the House of
Woodmentown
14
Freeing the Prisoner
36
(The) Funeral
61
G
(The Hunt for) Gandalf
Gathering Allies
(The) Gathering Gloom: 2961-2966
(The Story of) Geirbald
Geirbald’s Dying Wish
(Old) Geleswinta

140

72
110
64
69
71
89

(The) Ghost of the Forest
129
Ghosts of the East Bight
26
(A) Gift for the Dead
25
(If) Girion has neither Valdis nor Bain 111
(Reclaiming the) Greydelve
75
Grimfried
89
Grimfried’s Lust
92
(The) Guardian
112
Gwina		
90
H
Halbrech the Wineseller
130
Halbrech’s Fate
86
(Escaping the) Hall
93
(The) Hall of the Lamp
57
(The) Hand of Mogdred
12
Hartfast, of the House of Mountain Hall 14
(The) Haunted House
89
(Into the) Heart of Mirkwood
51
(The) Herb
92
(The) Hoard
100
Honeyed Words
109
(Running a) Holding
9
Holdings
6
(Rules of) Holdings
8
Holdings Table
8
Minimum Score
8
Rating
8
Specialities
9
Holdings Upkeep
9
Hunald, Spellbound Assassin
44
Hungry Spiders
39
Hunter Spiders
133
Hunting the White Deer
18
I
(The) Ill-Favoured Man
90
(The) Ill-Favoured Man Arrives
91
(The) Ill-Favoured Man Dies
92
Ingel, Berana and Radagasa
90
Ingomer, of the House of Woodland Hall 13
(An) Invisible Hand
47
K
Killing a Hart in Mirkwood
Kin & Hearth
(Geirbald) Kinslayer
(The Ailing) King

18
6
130
86

L
(The) Lair
(The Heart of the) Lair
(Get the) Lamp

54
55
102

(The Chest of the) Lamp
(Uncover the) Lamp
(The) Lamp is Lost
(The) Last Foe
(The) Last Good Years: 2947-2950
(The) Lieutenant of Dol Guldur
Light & Dark
Lost in the Sea of Trees
(A) Loving Daughter
M
(A) Messenger from Isengard
(The) Messenger
(The) Messenger of Mordor
(To the) Millfort
(Into the) Misty Mountains
Mogdred
(The Arrival of) Mogdred
(The Crimes of) Mogdred
(Attack of the) Mountain-trolls
(Crossing the) Mountains
Munderic the Ponderous

82
78
83
122
11
128
7
38
85

44
96
129
27
112
63, 131
62
60
112
121
62, 63

N
(The) Nature of the Beast
101
(The Coming of the) Nazgûl
77
The Nazgûl as Dark Undead
126
(The) Nazgûl of Dol Guldur
126
(The) Nazgûl Strikes
103
(The) Nazgûl when Unclad and Invisible 126
New Fellowship Phase Undertakings
Confer with Saruman
50
Drumming up Support
40
Patrol the Wild
58
Search for Answers
33
Tend a Holding
9
News from Afar
5
O
(Restoring the) Old Forest Road
(The) Old Road
(Castle) Orlmond
(The) Other Side
(The) Outlaw Camp
(The) Outlaws
(The Lair of the) Outlaws
(Vengeance of the) Outlaws
P
(Attending the) Parliament
(The) Passing Years
(The) Path of Song
Personal Stakes

30
28
109
113
69
25, 95
96
71

52
7
105
6

(The) Pit of the Exciled Dwarves
(Players & the) Plague
(The) Plague of Mirkwood
(Treating the) Plague
(The Plight of the) Prince
(The) Prince’s Tale
(Rescuing the) Prisoners
(The) Prodigal Son

18
88
87
88
108
95
80
15

R
Radagast the Brown
14
(What About) Radagast?
56
Raegenhere (incarnated Wood-wight) 93
(The) Raids Begin
47
Receive Title (Barding Thegn)
111
Receive Title (Hero of the Woodmen) 83
Receive Title (War-leader)
63
(The) Refuge
65
(The) Return of the Shadow: 2951-2960 24
Return to the Halls
33
(At) Rhosgobel
13
(To) Rhosgobel
48
(Weapons of the) Ringwraiths
127
(At) Rivendell
123
(The) River Bore
38
(A New) River-maiden
58
(The) River-maiden Uncloaked
46
(The) River-maiden’s Trap
55
(The) Roadwarden’s Staff
29
Ruithel
17
(Saving) Ruithel
19
Running the Campaign
6
Running this Adventure
119
S
Sarqin, the Mother-of-All
Saruman Revealed in Wrath
Saving the Village
Secrets of the Lamp
Secrets of the House
(An Ancient) Shadow Reborn
Shadow of Fear
(The) Shadow of the Mountain
Shadow of the Spider
(The) Sick Child
(A) Siege
(The) Silent Hall
(Battle at the) Skybridge Tree
Sorrow of the Maidens
Speech of Mortals
(A) Spider
Spider Magic
(Addressing the) Spiders

141

134
49
48
32
89
106
127
105
36
91
46
37
77
40
79
28
54
52

(The) Strangers from the East
Surviving the Encounter
(Crossing the) Swamps

59
68
35

T
(Using the) Tale of Years
6
Tauler, the Hunter
135
(Enter) Tauler
56
(Getting Past) Tauler
29
(Meeting) Tauler
53
Tearing Jaws
79
(Chasing the) Thieves
76
(At) Thranduil’s Court
73
Tracking the Fighting Strength of the
Woodmen
119
Tracking the Lost Boat
39
(A) Tragic Death
45
Treasure of the Trolls
68
Treachery
119
(The) Treachery of the Wineseller
85
Treachery of the Woodmen
102
(The) Troll Ambush
66
(From the) Tyrant’s Hill to the Fens of Dol
Guldur
21
Tyulqin, the Weaver
136
(The) Tyrant’s Hill
48
(The Lord of the) Tyrant’s Hill
13
(Servants of the) Tyrant’s Hill
12
(Confronting) Tyulqin
56
(The Girdle of) Tyulqin
56
V
Valdis		
131
(Battling) Valdis
107
(If) Valdis is dead, and Prince Bain is a 		
captive
111
(If) Valdis is still alive
110
(The Dark Schemes of) Valdis
97
Valley of Illusion
36
(The Lair of the) Vampire
106
(The Great) Vampire
107
(The) Voice in the Night
121
W
(The Decisions of the) War-Leader
63
(The) Election of the War-Leader
62
Weapons of the Ringwraiths
127
Weighted Nets
67
(Lure the) Werewolf
102
(The) Werewolf
32, 111
(The Curse of the) Werewolf
103
(The) Werewolf of Mirkwood
114
(The) Werewolf’s Hostage
103

The Darkening of
Mirkwood

(Siege of the) Wights
Wood-wights
(At) Woodland Hall
(To) Woodmen-town
(Travel to) Woodmen-town
(Exploring the) Woods

92
137
70
48, 57
101
35

Y
Year 2947
11
Adventuring Phase: The Wizard’s 		
Man
11
Events
11
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
13
Year 2948
13
Adventuring Phase: The Folk-moot 		
of Rhosgobel
13
Events
13
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
17
Year 2949
17
Adventuring Phase: The Questing 		
Beasts
17
Events
17
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
19
Year 2950
19
Adventuring Phase: Secrets Buried 20
Events
19
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
23
Year 2951
24
Adventuring Phase: The Helm of
Peace
24
Events
24
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
27
Year 2952
27
Adventuring Phase: The Staff of the
Roadwarden
27
Events
27
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
29
Year 2953
30
Adventuring Phase: The Beast of the 		
Forest
31
Events
30
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
34
Year 2954
34
Adventuring Phase: The Lost Path 34
Events
34
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
37
Year 2955
38
Adventuring Phase: Treacherous 		
Waters
38
Events
38
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
40
Year 2956
41
Adventuring Phase: Murder in

Lake-town
41
Events
41
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
45
Year 2957
45
Adventuring Phase: The Siege of
Black Tarn Hall
45
Events
45
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
50
Year 2958
50
Adventuring Phase: Saving the 		
Maiden
50
Events
50
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
50
Year 2959
58
Adventuring Phase: The Horse-Lord’s 		
Daughter
59
Events
58
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
61
Year 2960
61
Adventuring Phase: The Death of 		
Ingomer
61
Events
61
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
63
Year 2961
64
Adventuring Phase: Paying the Troll 65
Events
64
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
68
Year 2962
68
Adventuring Phase: Honour Among 		
Thieves
69
Events
68
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
71
Year 2963
71
Adventuring Phase: The Anger of the
Elvenking
71
Events
71
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
73
Year 2964
73
Adventuring Phase: The Greydelve 74
Events
73
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
75
Year 2965
75
Adventuring Phase: The Theft of the 		
Lamp
75
Events
75
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
79
Year 2966
80
Adventuring Phase: Return to Dol 		
Guldur
80
Events
80
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
83
Year 2967
84
Adventuring Phase: Treachery in the 		

142

Woods
84
Events
84
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
87
Year 2968
88
Adventuring Phase: Nine in 		
the Hall
89
Events
88
Events in the Hall
91
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
93
Year 2969
94
Adventuring Phase: Wheels within 		
Wheels
94
Events
94
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
97
Year 2970
97
Adventuring Phase: Slaying the Forest 		
Dragon
99
Events
97
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
100
Year 2971
101
Adventuring Phase: The Dying of the 		
Light
101
Events
101
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
104
Year 2972
104
Adventuring Phase: The Hame of the 		
Vampire
104
Events
104
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
108
Year 2973
108
Adventuring Phase: The Reach of the 		
Shadow
108
Events
108
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
111
Year 2974
111
Adventuring Phase: Beorn’s Quest 111
Events
111
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
115
Year 2975
116
Adventuring Phase: The Last
Folk-moot
116
Events
116
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
118
Year 2976
118
Adventuring Phase: The March of
the Woodmen
118
Adventuring Phase: To Rivendell 121
Events
118
Fellowship Phase: Year’s End
123
Year 2977
123
Epilogue: The Passing of the King 123
Events
123

‘Queer things you do hear these days, to be sure,’ said Sam. ‘Ah,’ said
Ted, ‘you do, if you listen. But I can hear fireside-tales and children’s

stories at home, if I want to.’ ‘No doubt you can,’ retorted Sam, ‘and
I daresay there’s more truth in some of them than you reckon. Who
invented the stories anyway?’

The Lord of the Rings, J.R.R. Tolkien

In the Hobbit Tales storytelling card game, players compete to tell
the most fantastic story. A narrator uses beautifully illustrated
large-format cards to form the basis of the tale, with the other
players interrupting with monster and hazard cards to disrupt
the storyteller and forcing them to think on their feet. Drinks are
served, smoke-rings are blown, and the best storyteller is cheered by
everyone present.

Hobbit Tales is a game for 2 to 5 Hobbits, designed by award-winning
designers Marco Maggi and Francesco Nepitello, creators of the War of
the Ring strategy game and The One Ring role-playing game.
This game contains a set of rules, 1 board, 75 Adventure cards, 40 Hazard
cards, 5 coasters, a set of cardboard tokens and a twelve-sided The One
Ring Feat die.
Includes rules to use Hobbit Tales in conjunction with the The One
Ring role-playing game set in Middle-earth.

CB72101
www.cubicle7.co.uk

The Heart of the Wild is a resource for The One Ring: Adventures Over the Edge of the Wild describing the
lands of the River and the Forest — the Vales of Anduin along the banks of the Great River, and the trackless
forest of Mirkwood to the east. It expands on the descriptions given in the Loremaster’s Guide, offering
new sanctuaries and new perils for the players to discover. Each region is described in detail, listing
potential friends and foes, sites of interest and potential adventures.
An expanded bestiary contains a host of
strange creatures and servants of the Enemy,
from the beasts of the forest to the fabled
Great Spiders. Variant Cultural Backgrounds
like River Hobbits or Wayward Elves offer
new options for adventurers, while new
Fellowship Phase actions bring the wild to life
in your games.
Follow the Anduin river down from the
chill springs of the Misty Mountains to
the southern edge of the Wild! Explore the
dread forest of Mirkwood, running from the
lonely thickets of the north to the very gates
of Dol Guldur! Enter the Heart of the Wild,
and defend it against the rising Shadow.

SKU: CB71007
Price: $34.99
www.cubicle7.co.uk

